 Now Is the Time for Decisive Action 
 “ How long will you be limping upon two different opinions ? ” ​ — 1 KINGS 18 : 21 . 
 What makes our time so different from the past ? 
 DO YOU believe that Jehovah is the only true God ? 
 Do you also believe that Bible prophecies point to our time as “ the last days ” of Satan’s wicked system ? 
 If so , you will surely agree that now , of all times , there is a need for decisive action . 
 Never before in human history have so many lives been at stake . 
 What happened in the ten - tribe kingdom of Israel during the reign of King Ahab ? 
 In the tenth century B.C.E . , the nation of Israel needed to make a very serious decision . 
 Whom would they serve ? 
 King Ahab , under the influence of his pagan wife , Jezebel , promoted Baal worship in the ten - tribe kingdom of Israel . 
 Baal was a fertility god who was supposed to provide rain and fruitful crops . 
 Many Baal worshippers may have blown a kiss or bowed down to an idol of their god . 
 To induce Baal to bless their crops and livestock , his worshippers took part in sex orgies with temple prostitutes . 
 They also had the custom of cutting themselves to make blood flow . ​ — 1 Kings 18 : 28 . 
 What effect did Baal worship have on God’s people ? 
 A remnant of some 7,000 Israelites refused to take part in this idolatrous , immoral , violent form of worship . 
 They loyally stuck to their covenant relationship with Jehovah God , and for this they were persecuted . 
 For example , Queen Jezebel murdered many prophets of Jehovah . 
 Because of these trying conditions , the majority of the Israelites practiced interfaith , trying to please both Jehovah and Baal . 
 But it was apostasy for an Israelite to turn away from Jehovah and worship a false god . 
 Jehovah promised to bless the Israelites if they loved him and obeyed his commandments . 
 However , he warned them that if they failed to give him “ exclusive devotion , ” they would be annihilated . ​ — Deuteronomy 5 : 6 - 10 ; 28 : 15 , 63 . 
 What did Jesus and his apostles foretell would happen among Christians , and how has it been fulfilled ? 
 A similar situation exists in Christendom today . 
 Church members claim to be Christians , but their holidays , behavior , and beliefs conflict with Bible teachings . 
 Like Jezebel , Christendom’s clergy spearhead the persecution of Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 Christendom’s clergy also have a long record of supporting wars and are thus responsible for the deaths of countless millions of church members . 
 Such religious support of worldly governments is identified in the Bible as spiritual fornication . 
 In addition , Christendom has become increasingly tolerant of literal fornication , even among its clergy . 
 Jesus Christ and his apostles foretold this great apostasy . 
 What will be the final outcome for the more than one billion adherents of Christendom ? 
 And what responsibility do true worshippers of Jehovah have toward these and all others who have been misled by false religion ? 
 We get a clear answer to such questions by examining the dramatic events that led to the ‘ annihilation of Baal out of Israel . ’ ​ — 2 Kings 10 : 28 . 
 God’s Love for His Wayward People 
 How did Jehovah show loving concern for his wayward people ? 
 Jehovah God takes no delight in punishing those who become unfaithful to him . 
 As a loving Father , he desires that wicked ones repent and turn back to him . 
 As evidence of this , Jehovah used many prophets in the days of Ahab and Jezebel to warn His people of the consequences of Baal worship . 
 Elijah was one such prophet . 
 After a devastating drought , which was announced in advance , Elijah told King Ahab to gather the Israelites and Baal prophets together on Mount Carmel . ​ — 1 Kings 18 : 1 , 19 . 
 6 , 7 . ( a ) How did Elijah expose the root cause of Israel’s apostasy ? 
 ( b ) What did the Baal prophets do ? 
 ( c ) What did Elijah do ? 
 The meeting took place at the site of an altar of Jehovah that had been “ torn down , ” probably to please Jezebel . 
 Sadly , the Israelites in attendance were not sure who ​ — Jehovah or Baal — ​ was in the best position to produce the much - needed rain . 
 Baal was represented by 450 prophets , whereas Elijah was the only prophet representing Jehovah . 
 Getting to the root of their problem , Elijah asked the people : “ How long will you be limping upon two different opinions ? ” 
 Then , in even plainer words , he placed the issue before them : “ If Jehovah is the true God , go following him ; but if Baal is , go following him . ” 
 To move the indecisive Israelites to render exclusive devotion to Jehovah , Elijah proposed a test of Godship . 
 Two bulls were to be slaughtered as a sacrifice , one for Jehovah and the other for Baal . 
 The true God would consume his sacrifice with fire . 
 The Baal prophets got their sacrifice ready , and then for hours they kept calling : “ O Baal , answer us ! ” 
 When Elijah began to mock them , they cut themselves until blood flowed , and they shouted at the top of their voice . 
 But there was no answer . ​ — 1 Kings 18 : 21 , 26 - 29 . 
 Now came Elijah’s turn . 
 First , he repaired the altar of Jehovah and placed the pieces of the young bull on it . 
 Next , he ordered that four large jars of water be poured on the sacrifice . 
 This was done three times until the trench around the altar was filled with water . 
 Then Elijah prayed : “ O Jehovah , the God of Abraham , Isaac and Israel , today let it be known that you are God in Israel and I am your servant and it is by your word that I have done all these things . 
 Answer me , O Jehovah , answer me , that this people may know that you , Jehovah , are the true God and you yourself have turned their heart back . ” ​ — 1 Kings 18 : 30 - 37 . 
 How did God respond to Elijah’s prayer , and what action did the prophet take ? 
 The true God responded by consuming both sacrifice and altar with fire from heaven . 
 That fire consumed even the water in the trench around the altar ! 
 Imagine the effect on the Israelites . 
 “ They immediately fell upon their faces and said : ‘ Jehovah is the true God ! 
 Jehovah is the true God ! ’ ” 
 Elijah now took further decisive action , ordering the Israelites : “ Seize the prophets of Baal ! 
 Do not let a single one of them escape ! ” 
 All 450 Baal prophets were then executed at the foot of Mount Carmel . ​ — 1 Kings 18 : 38 - 40 . 
 How were true worshippers still tested ? 
 On that same unforgettable day , Jehovah caused rain to fall upon the land for the first time in three and a half years ! 
 You can imagine all the talk among the Israelites as they returned home ; Jehovah had vindicated his Godship . 
 The Baal worshippers , however , did not give up . 
 Jezebel continued her campaign of persecuting Jehovah’s servants . 
 Thus the integrity of God’s people was again tested . 
 Would they be giving exclusive devotion to Jehovah when his day of judgment against Baal worshippers came ? 
 Act Decisively Now 
 ( a ) In modern times , what have anointed Christians been doing ? 
 ( b ) What does it mean to obey the command found at Revelation 18 : 4 ? 
 In modern times , anointed Christians have done a work like that of Elijah . 
 By word of mouth and by the printed page , they have warned people of all nations inside and outside of Christendom about the danger of false religion . 
 As a result , millions have taken decisive action to end their membership in false religion . 
 They have dedicated their lives to Jehovah and have become baptized disciples of Jesus Christ . 
 Yes , they have heeded God’s urgent appeal respecting false religion : “ Get out of her , my people , if you do not want to share with her in her sins , and if you do not want to receive part of her plagues . ” ​ — Revelation 18 : 4 . 
 What is needed to have Jehovah’s approval ? 
 Other millions , while attracted to the Bible - based message spread by Jehovah’s Witnesses , are still unsure about what they should do . 
 Some of these occasionally come to Christian meetings , such as the observance of the Lord’s Evening Meal or sessions of a district convention . 
 We urge all such ones to consider carefully Elijah’s words : “ How long will you sit on the fence ? ” 
 Instead of delaying , they need to take decisive action now and zealously work toward the goal of becoming dedicated , baptized worshippers of Jehovah . 
 Their prospects for everlasting life are at stake ! ​ — 2 Thessalonians 1 : 6 - 9 . 
 Into what dangerous condition have some baptized Christians slipped , and what should they do ? 
 Sadly , some baptized Christians have become irregular or inactive in their worship . 
 Some have lost their zeal because of fear of persecution , the anxieties of making a living , efforts to get rich , or the pursuit of selfish pleasures . 
 Jesus warned that these very things would stumble , choke , and ensnare some of his followers . 
 Instead of ‘ limping on two opinions , ’ as it were , such ones should “ be zealous and repent ” by taking decisive action to carry out their dedication to God . ​ — Revelation 3 : 15 - 19 . 
 False Religion’s Sudden End 
 Describe the situation in Israel when Jehu was anointed as king . 
 The reason why it is urgent for humans to take decisive action now is seen in what happened in Israel about 18 years after the issue of Godship was settled on Mount Carmel . 
 Jehovah’s day of judgment against Baal worship came suddenly and unexpectedly during the ministry of Elijah’s successor , Elisha . 
 King Ahab’s son Jehoram was ruling Israel , and Jezebel was still alive as queen mother . 
 Quietly , Elisha sent his attendant to anoint Israel’s army chief , Jehu , as the new king . 
 At the time , Jehu was on the east side of the Jordan at Ramoth - gilead , directing a war against Israel’s enemies . 
 King Jehoram was at Jezreel in the valley plain near Megiddo , recovering from a battle wound . ​ — 2 Kings 8 : 29 – 9 : 4 . 
 14 , 15 . 
 What commission did Jehu receive , and how did he respond ? 
 This is what Jehovah commanded Jehu to do : “ You must strike down the house of Ahab your lord , and I must avenge the blood of my servants the prophets and the blood of all the servants of Jehovah at the hand of Jezebel . 
 And the whole house of Ahab must perish ; . . . 
 Jezebel the dogs will eat up in the tract of land at Jezreel , and there will be no one burying her . ” ​ — 2 Kings 9 : 7 - 10 . 
 Jehu was a decisive man . 
 Without delay , he got into his chariot and sped toward Jezreel . 
 A watchman at Jezreel recognized the driving of Jehu and reported to King Jehoram , whereupon Jehoram got into his chariot and went out to meet his army chief . 
 When they met , Jehoram asked : “ Is there peace , Jehu ? ” 
 Jehu replied : “ What peace could there be as long as there are the fornications of Jezebel your mother and her many sorceries ? ” 
 Then , before King Jehoram could flee , Jehu drew his bow and killed Jehoram with an arrow that pierced his heart . ​ — 2 Kings 9 : 20 - 24 . 
 ( a ) What situation did Jezebel’s court officials suddenly face ? 
 ( b ) How was Jehovah’s word about Jezebel fulfilled ? 
 Wasting no time , Jehu raced to the city in his chariot . 
 Looking down from a window , the heavily made - up Jezebel greeted Jehu with a challenging threat . 
 Ignoring her , Jehu called for support : “ Who is with me ? 
 Who ? ” 
 Jezebel’s attendants now had to act decisively . 
 Two or three court officials stuck their heads out of the window . 
 Immediately , their loyalty was put to the test . 
 “ Let her drop ! ” 
 ordered Jehu . 
 The officials let Jezebel drop to the street below , where she was trampled by Jehu’s horses and chariot . 
 Thus the instigator of Baal worship in Israel came to her deserved end . 
 Before there was time to bury her , dogs had eaten up her fleshy parts , just as foretold . ​ — 2 Kings 9 : 30 - 37 . 
 God’s judgment upon Jezebel should strengthen our faith in what future event ? 
 A similar shocking end will come to the symbolic harlot who has the name “ Babylon the Great . ” 
 The harlot represents the false religions of Satan’s world , which have their origin in the ancient city of Babylon . 
 After false religion’s end , Jehovah God will turn his attention to all humans who make up the secular parts of Satan’s world . 
 These will also be destroyed , preparing the way for a righteous new world . ​ — Revelation 17 : 3 - 6 ; 19 : 19 - 21 ; 21 : 1 - 4 . 
 After Jezebel’s death , what happened to Baal worshippers in Israel ? 
 After Jezebel’s death , King Jehu wasted no time in executing all Ahab’s descendants and key supporters . 
 But many Baal - worshipping Israelites remained in the land . 
 Concerning these , Jehu took decisive action to show his “ toleration of no rivalry toward Jehovah . ” 
 Pretending to be a Baal worshipper himself , Jehu organized a great festival at the temple of Baal that Ahab had built in Samaria . 
 All Baal worshippers in Israel came to the festival . 
 Trapped inside the temple , they were all slaughtered by Jehu’s men . 
 The Bible concludes the account with the words : “ Thus Jehu annihilated Baal out of Israel . ” ​ — 2 Kings 10 : 18 - 28 . 
 What grand prospect awaits the “ great crowd ” of Jehovah’s loyal worshippers ? 
 Baal worship was eradicated from Israel . 
 Just as surely , this world’s false religions will come to a sudden , shocking end . 
 On whose side will you be during that great day of judgment ? 
 Act decisively now , and you may be privileged to be included among the “ great crowd ” of human survivors of “ the great tribulation . ” 
 Then you will be able to look back with joy , and you will praise God for executing judgment on “ the great harlot who corrupted the earth with her fornication . ” 
 United with other true worshippers , you will be in agreement with the thrilling words that heavenly voices sing : “ Praise Jah , you people , because Jehovah our God , the Almighty , has begun to rule as king . ” ​ — Revelation 7 : 9 , 10 , 14 ; 19 : 1 , 2 , 6 . 
 Questions for Meditation 
 • How did ancient Israel become guilty of Baal worship ? 
 • What great apostasy did the Bible foretell , and how has that prophecy been fulfilled ? 
 • How did Jehu eradicate Baal worship ? 
 • What must we do to survive God’s day of judgment ? 
 [ Map on page 25 ] 
 ( For fully formatted text , see publication ) 
 Socoh 
 Aphek 
 Helkath 
 Jokneam 
 Megiddo 
 Taanach 
 Dothan 
 SAMARIA 
 En - dor 
 Shunem 
 Ophrah 
 Jezreel 
 Ibleam ( Gath - rimmon ) 
 Tirzah 
 Beth - shemesh 
 Beth - shean ( Beth - shan ) 
 Jabesh - gilead ? 
 Abel - meholah 
 House of Arbel 
 Ramoth - gilead 
 Mountain Peaks 
 Mt . 
 Carmel 
 Mt . 
 Tabor 
 Moreh 
 Mt . 
 Gilboa 
 [ Bodies of water ] 
 Mediterranean Sea 
 Sea of Galilee 
 [ River ] 
 Jordan River 
 [ Spring and well ] 
 Well of Harod 
 [ Credit Line ] 
 Based on maps copyrighted by Pictorial Archive ( Near Eastern History ) Est . and Survey of Israel 
 [ Pictures on page 26 ] 
 Regularly sharing in Kingdom preaching and attending Christian meetings are vital aspects of true worship 
 [ Picture on page 28 , 29 ] 
 Like Jehu , all who want to survive Jehovah’s day must take decisive action 
 How Firm Is Your Trust in God ? 
 “ Keep on , then , seeking first the kingdom . ” ​ — MATTHEW 6 : 33 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What step as to employment did a young man take , and why ? 
 A YOUNG man wanted to be more useful in his congregation . 
 The problem was that his secular work interfered with his regular meeting attendance . 
 How did he address the situation ? 
 He simplified his life , resigned from his job , and in time found employment that did not interfere with his Christian activities . 
 Today , he earns much less than before , but he still cares for his family’s needs and is much better able to support the congregation . 
 Do you understand why that young man took such a step ? 
 Can you see yourself taking a similar step if you were in circumstances like his ? 
 Commendably , many Christians have , and their actions demonstrate their confidence in Jesus ’ promise : “ Keep on , then , seeking first the kingdom and his righteousness , and all these other things will be added to you . ” 
 They trust in Jehovah for security rather than in the secular world . ​ — Proverbs 3 : 23 , 26 . 
 Why may some wonder whether it is practical today to put God’s Kingdom first ? 
 In view of the difficult times we are living in , some may wonder whether that young man made a wise decision . 
 Today , one section of humanity lives in the deepest poverty while another enjoys the highest standard of living in history . 
 Most in poor lands would eagerly seize any opportunity to make their life a little easier . 
 On the other hand , many in wealthier lands feel the pressure of maintaining their standard of living in the face of faltering economies , changing job markets , and ever more demanding employers . 
 In view of the pressure involved in making a living , some may wonder , ‘ Is it still practical to seek the Kingdom first ? ’ 
 To help answer that question , consider the audience that Jesus was addressing . 
 “ Stop Being Anxious ” 
 4 , 5 . 
 How did Jesus illustrate that it was reasonable for God’s people not to be overly anxious about everyday concerns ? 
 Jesus was in Galilee , speaking to a large crowd of people from many places . 
 Few if any of those people were wealthy . 
 Likely , most were poor . 
 Yet , Jesus urged them to give priority , not to the gaining of material wealth , but to the storing up of something far more valuable ​ — spiritual treasure . 
 He said : “ Stop being anxious about your souls as to what you will eat or what you will drink , or about your bodies as to what you will wear . 
 Does not the soul mean more than food and the body than clothing ? ” ​ — Matthew 6 : 25 . 
 To many of those listening , Jesus ’ words might have sounded impractical . 
 They knew that if they did not work hard , their families would suffer . 
 However , Jesus reminded them about the birds . 
 Birds live from one day to the next , yet Jehovah cares for them . 
 Jesus also pointed to the way Jehovah provides for wildflowers , the beauty of which surpasses that of Solomon in all his glory . 
 If Jehovah cares for birds and flowers , how much more so will he care for us ? 
 As Jesus said , our lives ( souls ) and bodies are far more important than the food we buy to sustain our lives and the clothing we obtain to cover our bodies . 
 If we devote all our efforts merely to feed and cover ourselves , with nothing substantial left for serving Jehovah , we miss the very purpose of living . ​ — Ecclesiastes 12 : 13 . 
 A Balanced Viewpoint 
 ( a ) For what are Christians responsible ? 
 ( b ) Where do Christians place their complete trust ? 
 Of course , Jesus did not encourage his listeners to stop working and wait for God somehow to provide for their families . 
 Even the birds have to search for food for themselves and their young . 
 Thus , Christians had to work if they wanted to eat . 
 They had to care for family responsibilities . 
 Christian servants and slaves had to work diligently for their masters . 
 The apostle Paul often worked as a tentmaker to support himself . 
 Still , those Christians did not look to secular work for security . 
 They trusted in Jehovah . 
 As a result , they enjoyed an inner peace unknown to others . 
 The psalmist said : “ Those trusting in Jehovah are like Mount Zion , which cannot be made to totter , but dwells even to time indefinite . ” ​ — Psalm 125 : 1 . 
 What might be the viewpoint of one who does not trust firmly in Jehovah ? 
 Anyone who does not trust firmly in Jehovah might think differently . 
 The majority of humans view material wealth as a major key to security . 
 Hence , parents have encouraged their offspring to invest much of their young adulthood in higher education , hoping that it will prepare them for well - paying careers . 
 Sadly , some Christian families have found the cost of such an investment to be very high , as their children have lost their spiritual focus and turned to pursuing materialistic goals . 
 What balance do Christians maintain ? 
 Hence , wise Christians realize that Jesus ’ counsel applies as much today as it did in the first century , and they try to keep a balance . 
 Even if they have to spend long hours in secular work in order to care for Scriptural responsibilities , they never allow the need to earn money to blind them to the more important spiritual matters . ​ — Ecclesiastes 7 : 12 . 
 “ Never Be Anxious ” 
 How does Jesus reassure those who fully trust in Jehovah ? 
 In his Sermon on the Mount , Jesus urged his listeners : “ Never be anxious and say , ‘ What are we to eat ? ’ 
 or , ‘ What are we to drink ? ’ 
 or , ‘ What are we to put on ? ’ 
 For all these are the things the nations are eagerly pursuing . 
 For your heavenly Father knows you need all these things . ” 
 What encouraging words ! 
 If we trust fully in Jehovah , he will always be there to support us . 
 However , Jesus ’ words are also sobering . 
 They remind us that if we “ eagerly ” pursue material things , our thinking is like that of “ the nations , ” people who are not true Christians . 
 When a young man approached Jesus for counsel , how did Jesus reveal what the young man loved most ? 
 On one occasion , a very wealthy young man asked Jesus what he should do to gain everlasting life . 
 Jesus reminded him of the requirements of the Law , which was still in operation at the time . 
 The young man assured Jesus : “ I have kept all these ; what yet am I lacking ? ” 
 Jesus ’ reply might have sounded impractical to many . 
 He said : “ If you want to be perfect , go sell your belongings and give to the poor and you will have treasure in heaven , and come be my follower . ” 
 The young man went away sad , unable to contemplate losing his wealth . 
 However much he loved Jehovah , he loved his possessions more . 
 11 , 12 . ( a ) What sobering words did Jesus utter regarding wealth ? 
 ( b ) How can possessions be a barrier to serving Jehovah ? 
 That event led Jesus to say something unexpected : “ It will be a difficult thing for a rich man to get into the kingdom of the heavens . . . . 
 It is easier for a camel to get through a needle’s eye than for a rich man to get into the kingdom of God . ” 
 Did Jesus mean that no wealthy person will inherit the Kingdom ? 
 No , for he went on to say : “ With God all things are possible . ” 
 Indeed , with Jehovah’s help some wealthy people back then did become anointed Christians . 
 Nevertheless , Jesus said those surprising words for good reason . 
 He was giving a warning . 
 If a person becomes attached to his possessions as that wealthy young man did , they could become a barrier to his serving Jehovah wholeheartedly . 
 That could be true both of one who is already wealthy and of one who is “ determined to be rich . ” 
 Trusting too much in material things can lead a person to be less ‘ conscious of his spiritual need . ’ 
 As a result , he might not feel the same need for Jehovah’s support . 
 He might come to expect special treatment in the congregation . 
 And he could spend most of his time enjoying his wealth rather than serving Jehovah . 
 Cultivate the Right Viewpoint 
 What wrong viewpoint did the Laodiceans have ? 
 One group with a wrong view of possessions was the first - century congregation in Laodicea . 
 Jesus said to them : “ You say : ‘ I am rich and have acquired riches and do not need anything at all , ’ but you do not know you are miserable and pitiable and poor and blind and naked . ” 
 It was not their wealth that brought the Laodiceans to such a pitiable spiritual situation . 
 It was the fact that they trusted in wealth rather than in Jehovah . 
 As a result , they were spiritually lukewarm , near to being ‘ vomited out of ’ Jesus ’ mouth . ​ — Revelation 3 : 14 - 17 . 
 Why did the Hebrew Christians merit Paul’s commendation ? 
 On the other hand , Paul commended the Hebrew Christians for their attitude during an earlier time of persecution . 
 He said : “ You both expressed sympathy for those in prison and joyfully took the plundering of your belongings , knowing you yourselves have a better and an abiding possession . ” 
 Those Christians were not devastated by the loss of their possessions . 
 They retained their joy because they kept hold of their most valuable possession , their “ better and . . . abiding possession . ” 
 Like the merchant of Jesus ’ parable who sacrificed everything for one valuable pearl , they were determined not to loosen their grip on the Kingdom hope , whatever the cost . 
 What a fine attitude ! 
 How did a Christian woman in Liberia put Kingdom interests first ? 
 Many today have cultivated a similar fine attitude . 
 In Liberia , for example , a young Christian woman was offered the opportunity to study at the university . 
 In that country , such an offer is viewed as a way to a secure future . 
 However , she was a pioneer , a full - time evangelizer , and had received an invitation to serve as a temporary special pioneer . 
 She chose to seek first the Kingdom and remain in full - time service . 
 She went to her assignment and started 21 Bible studies in three months . 
 This young sister and thousands like her seek first the Kingdom , even at the cost of possible material advantages . 
 How do they maintain such an attitude in this materialistic world ? 
 They have cultivated a number of fine qualities . 
 Let us discuss some of these . 
 16 , 17 . ( a ) Why is modesty important if we are to trust in Jehovah ? 
 ( b ) Why should we cultivate confidence in God’s promises ? 
 Modesty : The Bible says : “ Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding . 
 In all your ways take notice of him , and he himself will make your paths straight . 
 Do not become wise in your own eyes . ” 
 Sometimes , a certain course might seem practical from a secular point of view . 
 Still , a sincere Christian looks to Jehovah for guidance . 
 ‘ In all his ways ’ ​ — in congregation matters , education or secular work , relaxation , or anything else — ​ he modestly seeks Jehovah’s counsel . ​ — Psalm 73 : 24 . 
 Confidence in Jehovah’s promises : Paul said : “ He that approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him . ” 
 If we doubt that Jehovah will fulfill his promises , it might seem logical to ‘ use this world to the full . ’ 
 On the other hand , if our belief is strong , we will be determined to seek the Kingdom first . 
 How can a strong belief be developed ? 
 By drawing close to Jehovah in constant , heartfelt prayer and through regular personal study . 
 Like King David , we can pray : “ In you I have put my trust , O Jehovah . 
 I have said : ‘ You are my God . ’ 
 How abundant your goodness is ! ” ​ — Psalm 31 : 14 , 19 . 
 18 , 19 . ( a ) How does industriousness strengthen our trust in Jehovah ? 
 ( b ) Why should a Christian be willing to make sacrifices ? 
 Diligence in Jehovah’s service : Paul linked confidence in Jehovah’s promises with industriousness when he wrote : “ We desire each one of you to show the same industriousness so as to have the full assurance of the hope down to the end . ” 
 If we are busy in Jehovah’s service , he will support us . 
 Each time we experience that support , our trust in him gets stronger , we become “ steadfast , unmovable . ” 
 Our faith is renewed , and our hope confirmed . ​ — Ephesians 3 : 16 - 19 . 
 Willingness to make sacrifices : Paul sacrificed a promising career in order to follow Jesus . 
 He clearly made the right choice , although his life was sometimes hard from a material standpoint . 
 Jehovah does not promise a life of luxury , and sometimes his servants endure hardships . 
 Our willingness to simplify our lifestyle and make sacrifices proves the strength of our determination to serve Jehovah . ​ — 1 Timothy 6 : 6 - 8 . 
 Why is patience vital for one who puts Kingdom interests first ? 
 Patience : The disciple James urged fellow Christians : “ Exercise patience , therefore , brothers , until the presence of the Lord . ” 
 In this fast - moving world , it is difficult to be patient . 
 We want things to happen quickly . 
 But Paul urges us to imitate those who “ through faith and patience inherit the promises . ” 
 Be willing to wait on Jehovah . 
 Everlasting life on a paradise earth ​ — surely that is worth waiting for ! 
 ( a ) What do we demonstrate when we put Kingdom interests first ? 
 ( b ) What will be discussed in the following article ? 
 Yes , Jesus ’ counsel to seek first the Kingdom is practical . 
 When we do so , we demonstrate that we really trust in Jehovah and choose the only safe way for a Christian to live . 
 However , Jesus also counseled us to keep on “ seeking first . . . 
 [ God’s ] righteousness . ” 
 In the following article , we will see why that encouragement is especially needed today . 
 Can You Explain ? 
 • With regard to material things , what balance did Jesus encourage us to have ? 
 • What do we learn from Jesus ’ illustration of the camel and the needle’s eye ? 
 • What Christian qualities help us to seek first God’s Kingdom ? 
 [ Picture on page 21 ] 
 Many who heard Jesus ’ words were poor 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 The merchant in Jesus ’ parable sacrificed everything for one valuable pearl 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 The wealthy young man loved his possessions more than he loved God 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 If we are busy in Jehovah’s service , he will support us 
 Seeking Righteousness Will Protect Us 
 “ Keep on , then , seeking first . . . 
 [ God’s ] righteousness . ” ​ — MATTHEW 6 : 33 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What decision did a young Christian make , and why did she make that decision ? 
 A YOUNG Christian woman in Asia worked as a secretary in a government office . 
 She was conscientious , reporting for work early and not loitering at her job . 
 However , since her position was not permanent , it came up for review . 
 The head of the department told the young woman that he would employ her permanently and even give her a higher position , provided she would have an immoral relationship with him . 
 This she flatly refused , even though it would mean the loss of her employment . 
 Was that young Christian woman unrealistic ? 
 No , she was carefully following Jesus ’ words : “ Keep on , then , seeking first . . . 
 [ God’s ] righteousness . ” 
 For her , following righteous principles was far more important than gaining an advantage by means of committing sexual immorality . ​ — 1 Corinthians 6 : 18 . 
 The Importance of Righteousness 
 What is righteousness ? 
 “ Righteousness ” implies a state of moral integrity and honesty . 
 In the Bible , the Greek and Hebrew words have the thought of “ rectitude ” or “ uprightness . ” 
 It is not self - righteousness , judging oneself by one’s own standards . 
 It is uprightness according to Jehovah’s standards . 
 It is God’s righteousness . ​ — Romans 1 : 17 ; 3 : 21 . 
 Why is righteousness important to a Christian ? 
 Why is righteousness important ? 
 Because Jehovah , the “ righteous God , ” favors his people when they practice righteousness . 
 Anyone who works unrighteousness cannot have a close relationship with him . 
 That is why the apostle Paul urged Timothy : “ Flee from the desires incidental to youth , but pursue righteousness , ” along with other vital qualities . 
 It is also why Paul included “ the breastplate of righteousness ” when he listed the various parts of our spiritual armor . ​ — Ephesians 6 : 14 . 
 How can imperfect creatures seek righteousness ? 
 Of course , no human is righteous in a complete sense . 
 All inherit imperfection from Adam , and all are sinful , unrighteous , from birth . 
 Yet , Jesus said that we should seek righteousness . 
 How is that possible ? 
 In that Jesus gave his perfect life as a ransom for us , and if we exercise faith in that sacrifice , Jehovah is willing to forgive our sins . 
 On that basis , as we learn Jehovah’s righteous standards and do our utmost to observe them ​ — praying for help to overcome our weaknesses — ​ Jehovah accepts our worship . 
 How comforting that is ! 
 Righteous in an Unrighteous World 
 Why was the world a dangerous place for the early Christians ? 
 When Jesus ’ disciples received the commission to be his witnesses “ to the most distant part of the earth , ” they faced a difficult situation . 
 All their assigned territory was “ lying in the power of the wicked one , ” Satan . 
 The world was infected with the wicked spirit that he promotes , and Christians would be exposed to its contaminating influence . 
 For them , the world was a dangerous place . 
 Only by seeking first God’s righteousness could they endure with their integrity intact . 
 Most did endure , but a few were diverted from “ the path of righteousness . ” ​ — Proverbs 12 : 28 ; 2 Timothy 4 : 10 . 
 What responsibilities require that a Christian resist corrupting influences ? 
 Is the world safer for Christians today ? 
 By no means ! 
 It is even more corrupt than it was in the first century . 
 In addition , Satan has been cast down to the earth and wages vicious warfare against anointed Christians , “ the remaining ones of [ the woman’s ] seed , who observe the commandments of God and have the work of bearing witness to Jesus . ” 
 Satan also attacks any who support that “ seed . ” 
 Yet , Christians cannot hide from the world . 
 While no part of it , they have to live in it . 
 And they have to preach in it to seek out rightly disposed people and teach them to be disciples of Christ . 
 Therefore , since Christians cannot entirely avoid the corrupting influences in this world , they have to resist them . 
 Let us consider four of those influences . 
 The Trap of Immorality 
 Why did the Israelites turn to worshipping the gods of the Moabites ? 
 Toward the end of their 40 - year trek in the wilderness , a large number of Israelites turned from the path of righteousness . 
 They had witnessed many acts of deliverance by Jehovah , and soon they would march into the Promised Land . 
 Yet , at that critical point , they turned to serving the gods of the Moabites . 
 Why ? 
 They succumbed to “ the desire of the flesh . ” 
 The record says : “ The people started to have immoral relations with the daughters of Moab . ” ​ — Numbers 25 : 1 . 
 9 , 10 . 
 What situation today makes it vital always to keep in mind the corrupting power of wrong fleshly desires ? 
 That episode demonstrates the way wrong fleshly desires can corrupt unwary ones . 
 We do well to learn from it , especially since immorality has become widely viewed as an acceptable lifestyle . 
 A report from the United States says : “ Until around 1970 , cohabitation [ the practice of unmarried couples living together ] was illegal in all American states . 
 Now , it is routine . 
 More than half of all first marriages are preceded by cohabitation . ” 
 That and similar loose moral practices are not limited to one country . 
 They are found all around the world , and sadly , some Christians have followed the trend ​ — even losing their standing in the Christian congregation . ​ — 1 Corinthians 5 : 11 . 
 Moreover , propaganda promoting immorality seems to be everywhere . 
 Movies and television programs suggest that it is perfectly acceptable for young people to have sex before marriage . 
 Homosexual relationships are depicted as normal . 
 And many shows depict increasingly graphic sex . 
 Pictures of graphic sex are also easily accessible on the Internet . 
 For instance , a newspaper columnist reported that his seven - year - old son came home from school and excitedly told his father that a school friend had come across an Internet site showing naked women performing sex acts . 
 The father was horrified , but how many children have come across such sites without telling their parents ? 
 In addition , how many parents know the contents of the video games their children play ? 
 Many popular games feature disgusting immorality , as well as demonism and violence . 
 How can a family be protected from the immorality of the world ? 
 How can a family resist such degraded “ entertainment ” ? 
 By seeking first God’s righteousness , refusing to get involved with anything immoral . 
 Parents who properly oversee their children’s activities and inculcate in their children a love of Jehovah and his righteous laws fortify them against pornography , pornographic video games , immoral movies , and other unrighteous temptations . ​ — Deuteronomy 6 : 4 - 9 . 
 * 
 The Danger of Community Pressure 
 What problem arose in the first century ? 
 When Paul was in Lystra in Asia Minor , he miraculously healed a man . 
 The account says : “ The crowds , seeing what Paul had done , raised their voices , saying in the Lycaonian tongue : ‘ The gods have become like humans and have come down to us ! ’ 
 And they went calling Barnabas Zeus , but Paul Hermes , since he was the one taking the lead in speaking . ” 
 Later those same crowds wanted to kill Paul and Barnabas . 
 Clearly , those people were very susceptible to community pressure . 
 It seems that when some from that region became Christians , they did not lose their superstitious tendencies . 
 In his letter to Christians in Colossae , Paul warned against the “ worship of the angels . ” ​ — Colossians 2 : 18 . 
 What are some customs that a Christian has to avoid , and how can he find the strength to do so ? 
 Today , true Christians likewise need to avoid popularly accepted customs based on false religious ideas that violate Christian principles . 
 In some lands , for example , many customary ceremonies surrounding birth and death are based on the lie that we have a spirit that survives death . 
 There are lands in which it is the custom to subject young girls to female genital mutilation . 
 * This is a cruel , unnecessary practice that is out of harmony with the loving care that Christian parents owe their children . 
 How can Christians resist community pressures and abandon such practices ? 
 By having complete trust in Jehovah . 
 The righteous God will strengthen and care for those who say to him from their heart : “ You are my refuge and my stronghold , my God , in whom I will trust . ” ​ — Psalm 91 : 2 ; Proverbs 29 : 25 . 
 Do Not Forget Jehovah 
 What warning did Jehovah give the Israelites shortly before they entered the Promised Land ? 
 Shortly before the Israelites entered the Promised Land , Jehovah warned them not to forget him . 
 He said : “ Watch out for yourself that you may not forget Jehovah your God so as not to keep his commandments and his judicial decisions and his statutes that I am commanding you today ; for fear that you may eat and indeed satisfy yourself , and you may build good houses and indeed dwell in them , and your herd and your flock may increase , and silver and gold may increase for you , and all that is yours may increase ; and your heart may indeed be lifted up and you may indeed forget Jehovah your God . ” ​ — Deuteronomy 8 : 11 - 14 . 
 How can we be sure that we are not forgetting Jehovah ? 
 Could something similar happen today ? 
 Yes , if we have the wrong priorities . 
 However , if we seek first God’s righteousness , pure worship will be the most important thing in our lives . 
 We will , as Paul encouraged us to do , ‘ buy out the opportune time ’ and have a sense of urgency in our ministry . 
 If , though , meeting attendance and field service are less important to us than relaxation or finding ways to have a good time , we could forget Jehovah in the sense of viewing him as secondary in our lives . 
 Paul said that in the last days , men would be “ lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God . ” 
 Sincere Christians examine themselves regularly to be sure that they are not influenced by that kind of thinking . ​ — 2 Corinthians 13 : 5 . 
 Beware of an Independent Spirit 
 What wrong spirit was manifested by Eve and by some in Paul’s day ? 
 In Eden , Satan successfully appealed to Eve’s selfish desire for independence . 
 Eve wanted to make her own decisions about right and wrong . 
 In the first century , some in the Corinthian congregation had a similar independent spirit . 
 They thought they knew better than Paul , and he sarcastically called them superfine apostles . ​ — 2 Corinthians 11 : 3 - 5 ; 1 Timothy 6 : 3 - 5 . 
 How can we avoid developing an independent spirit ? 
 In the world today , many are “ headstrong , puffed up with pride , ” and some Christians have been influenced by that way of thinking . 
 Some have even become opposers of the truth . 
 When it comes to pure worship , it is vital that we look to Jehovah for direction and cooperate with “ the faithful and discreet slave ” and the congregation elders . 
 That is a way to seek righteousness , and it protects us from developing an independent spirit . 
 The congregation of the anointed is “ a pillar and support of the truth . ” 
 Jehovah has provided it to protect and guide us . 
 Recognizing its vital role will help us to ‘ do nothing out of egotism ’ as we humbly submit to Jehovah’s righteous will . ​ — Philippians 2 : 2 - 4 ; Proverbs 3 : 4 - 6 . 
 Be Imitators of Jesus 
 We are encouraged to imitate Jesus in what ways ? 
 Of Jesus , the Bible prophetically says : “ You have loved righteousness and you hate wickedness . ” 
 What a fine attitude to imitate ! 
 Jesus did not merely know Jehovah’s upright standards ; he loved them . 
 So when Satan tempted him in the wilderness , Jesus was unhesitating and firm in his refusal to stray from “ the path of righteousness . ” ​ — Proverbs 8 : 20 ; Matthew 4 : 3 - 11 . 
 19 , 20 . 
 What are the good results of seeking righteousness ? 
 True , the unrighteous desires of the flesh can be strong . 
 Still , if righteousness is precious to us , this will strengthen us against wickedness . 
 A deep love of righteousness will shield us when we are confronted by what is wrong . 
 Remember , whenever we give in to temptation , we give Satan a victory . 
 How much better to resist him and give the victory to Jehovah ! ​ — Proverbs 27 : 11 ; James 4 : 7 , 8 . 
 Because they seek righteousness , true Christians are “ filled with righteous fruit , which is through Jesus Christ , to God’s glory and praise . ” 
 They put on “ the new personality which was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty . ” 
 They belong to Jehovah and live to serve him , not to please themselves . 
 That is what governs their thoughts and actions . 
 What delight they bring to the heart of their heavenly Father ! ​ — Proverbs 23 : 24 . 
 [ Footnotes ] 
 Valuable suggestions for parents on protecting the family from immoral influences are found in the book The Secret of Family Happiness , published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 Female genital mutilation used to be called female circumcision . 
 Can You Explain ? 
 • Why is it vital to seek righteousness ? 
 • How can an imperfect Christian seek righteousness ? 
 • What are some things in the world that a Christian has to avoid ? 
 • How does seeking righteousness protect us ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 For Jesus ’ followers , the world was a dangerous place 
 [ Picture on page 27 ] 
 Children who are taught to love Jehovah will be fortified against immorality 
 [ Picture on page 28 ] 
 Some Israelites forgot Jehovah after they became prosperous in the Promised Land 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 Like Jesus , Christians hate unrighteousness 
 Do Not Allow Place for the Devil 
 “ Do not give the Devil a chance . ” ​ — EPHESIANS 4 : 27 , Byington . 
 Why have many questioned the existence of the Devil ? 
 FOR centuries , many people thought of the Devil as a horned , cloven - hoofed creature clad in red and using a pitchfork to cast wicked humans into a fiery hell . 
 The Bible does not support that idea . 
 Undoubtedly , however , such misconceptions have caused millions to question the existence of the Devil or to think that the term applies only to a principle of evil . 
 What are some Scriptural facts about the Devil ? 
 The Bible provides eyewitness evidence and clear testimony that the Devil exists . 
 Jesus Christ saw him in the heavenly spirit realm and spoke to him on the earth . 
 Although the Scriptures do not reveal this spirit creature’s original name , they call him the Devil ( meaning “ Slanderer ” ) because he has slandered God . 
 He is also called Satan ( meaning “ Resister ” ) , since he resists Jehovah . 
 Satan the Devil is referred to as “ the original serpent , ” apparently because he used a serpent to deceive Eve . 
 He is also known as “ the wicked one . ” ​ — Matthew 6 : 13 . 
 * 
 We will consider what question ? 
 As Jehovah’s servants , in no way do we want to resemble Satan , the archenemy of the only true God . 
 We must therefore heed the apostle Paul’s counsel : “ Do not give the Devil a chance . ” 
 What , then , are some of Satan’s traits that we must not imitate ? 
 Do Not Imitate the Great Slanderer 
 How did “ the wicked one ” slander God ? 
 “ The wicked one ” deserves to be called the Devil , for he is a slanderer . 
 Slander is a false , malicious , and defamatory statement about someone . 
 God commanded Adam : “ As for the tree of the knowledge of good and bad you must not eat from it , for in the day you eat from it you will positively die . ” 
 Eve had been informed of this , but through a serpent , the Devil told her : “ You positively will not die . 
 For God knows that in the very day of your eating from it your eyes are bound to be opened and you are bound to be like God , knowing good and bad . ” 
 That was malicious slander against Jehovah God ! 
 Why did Diotrephes deserve to be called to account for slandering ? 
 The Israelites were commanded : “ You must not go around among your people for the sake of slandering . ” 
 The apostle John stated concerning a slanderer in his day : “ I wrote something to the congregation , but Diotrephes , who likes to have the first place among them , does not receive anything from us with respect . 
 That is why , if I come , I will call to remembrance his works which he goes on doing , chattering about us with wicked words . ” 
 Diotrephes was slandering John and deserved to be called to account for it . 
 What loyal Christian would want to be like Diotrephes and imitate Satan , the great slanderer ? 
 6 , 7 . 
 Why would we want to avoid slandering anyone ? 
 Slanderous statements and false accusations are often hurled against Jehovah’s servants . 
 “ The chief priests and the scribes kept standing up and vehemently accusing [ Jesus ] . ” 
 Paul was falsely accused by High Priest Ananias and others . 
 And the Bible speaks of Satan as “ the accuser of our brothers . . . , who accuses them day and night before our God . ” 
 Those falsely accused brothers are the anointed Christians on earth in these last days . 
 No Christian would want to slander anyone or make false accusations . 
 Yet , that could happen if we did not have all the facts before bearing witness against someone . 
 Under the Mosaic Law , deliberately testifying falsely could result in death for the accuser . 
 Moreover , things detestable to Jehovah include “ a false witness that launches forth lies . ” 
 Surely , then , we want to avoid imitating the principal slanderer and false accuser . 
 Shun the Ways of the Original Manslayer 
 In what way was the Devil “ a manslayer when he began ” ? 
 The Devil is a manslayer . 
 “ That one was a manslayer when he began , ” said Jesus . 
 Beginning with his first act in turning Adam and Eve away from God , Satan has been a manslayer . 
 He brought death upon the first human pair and their offspring . 
 It may be noted that this action can be attributed only to a person , not to a mere principle of evil . 
 As indicated at 1 John 3 : 15 , how can we become manslayers ? 
 “ You must not murder , ” states one of the Ten Commandments given to Israel . 
 Addressing Christians , the apostle Peter wrote : “ Let none of you suffer as a murderer . ” 
 So as Jehovah’s servants , we would not commit murder . 
 Yet , we would bear guilt before God if we hated a fellow Christian and wished him dead . 
 “ Everyone who hates his brother is a manslayer [ or , “ murderer ” ] , ” wrote the apostle John , “ and you know that no manslayer has everlasting life remaining in him . ” 
 The Israelites were commanded : “ You must not hate your brother in your heart . ” 
 May we be quick to resolve any problem that arises between us and a fellow believer , so that the manslayer Satan does not destroy our Christian unity . ​ — Luke 17 : 3 , 4 . 
 Stand Firm Against the Chief Liar 
 10 , 11 . 
 What must we do in order to stand firm against the chief liar , Satan ? 
 The Devil is a liar . 
 “ When he speaks the lie , ” said Jesus , “ he speaks according to his own disposition , because he is a liar and the father of the lie . ” 
 Satan lied to Eve , whereas Jesus came into the world to bear witness to the truth . 
 If we are to stand firm against the Devil as followers of Christ , we cannot resort to lies and deception . 
 We must “ speak truthfully . ” 
 “ Jehovah the God of truth ” blesses only his truthful Witnesses . 
 The wicked have no right to represent him . ​ — Psalm 31 : 5 ; 50 : 16 ; Isaiah 43 : 10 . 
 If we cherish our spiritual freedom from satanic lies , we will cling to Christianity , “ the way of the truth . ” 
 The whole body of Christian teachings constitutes “ the truth of the good news . ” 
 Our very salvation depends on our “ walking in the truth ” ​ — adhering to it and standing firm against “ the father of the lie . ” ​ — 3 John 3 , 4 , 8 . 
 Resist the Foremost Apostate 
 12 , 13 . 
 How should we treat apostates ? 
 The spirit creature who became the Devil was once in the truth . 
 But “ he did not stand fast in the truth , ” said Jesus , “ because truth is not in him . ” 
 This foremost apostate has pursued a relentless course of resistance to “ the God of truth . ” 
 Some first - century Christians fell into “ the snare of the Devil , ” apparently becoming his victims because of being misled and deviating from the truth . 
 So Paul urged his coworker Timothy to instruct them with mildness so that they might recover spiritually and get free from Satan’s snare . 
 Of course , it is much better to cling firmly to the truth and not be ensnared by apostate views in the first place . 
 Because of listening to the Devil and not rejecting his lies , the first human pair apostatized . 
 So , then , should we listen to apostates , read their literature , or examine their Web sites on the Internet ? 
 If we love God and the truth , we will not do so . 
 We should not allow apostates into our homes or even greet them , for such actions would make us ‘ sharers in their wicked works . ’ 
 May we never succumb to the Devil’s wiles by abandoning the Christian “ path of truth ” to follow false teachers who seek to “ introduce ruinous ideologies ” and try to ‘ exploit us with well - turned phrases . ’ ​ — 2 Peter 2 : 1 - 3 , Byington . 
 14 , 15 . 
 What warning did Paul give elders from Ephesus and his coworker Timothy ? 
 Paul told Christian elders from Ephesus : “ Pay attention to yourselves and to all the flock , among which the holy spirit has appointed you overseers , to shepherd the congregation of God , which he purchased with the blood of his own Son . 
 I know that after my going away oppressive wolves will enter in among you and will not treat the flock with tenderness , and from among you yourselves men will rise and speak twisted things to draw away the disciples after themselves . ” 
 In time , such apostates did arise and “ speak twisted things . ” 
 In about 65 C.E . , the apostle urged Timothy to ‘ handle the word of the truth aright . ’ 
 “ But , ” wrote Paul , “ shun empty speeches that violate what is holy ; for they will advance to more and more ungodliness , and their word will spread like gangrene . 
 Hymenaeus and Philetus are of that number . 
 These very men have deviated from the truth , saying that the resurrection has already occurred ; and they are subverting the faith of some . ” 
 Apostasy had begun ! 
 “ For all that , ” added Paul , “ the solid foundation of God stays standing . ” ​ — 2 Timothy 2 : 15 - 19 . 
 Despite the wiles of the foremost apostate , why have we been loyal to God and his Word ? 
 Satan has often used apostates in an effort to corrupt true worship ​ — but to no avail . 
 About the year 1868 , Charles Taze Russell began a careful examination of long - accepted doctrines of Christendom’s churches and found misinterpretations of the Scriptures . 
 Russell and a few other truth - seekers formed a Bible study class in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , U.S.A . 
 In the nearly 140 years since then , Jehovah’s servants have grown in knowledge and love of God and his Word . 
 Despite the wiles of the foremost apostate , the spiritual vigilance of the faithful and discreet slave class has helped these true Christians to remain loyal to Jehovah and his Word . ​ — Matthew 24 : 45 . 
 Never Let the World’s Ruler Get a Hold on You 
 17 - 19 . 
 What is the world that is lying in the Devil’s power , and why should we not love it ? 
 Another way that Satan seeks to ensnare us is by inducing us to love this world ​ — unrighteous human society alienated from God . 
 Jesus called the Devil “ the ruler of the world ” and said : “ He has no hold on me . ” 
 May Satan never get a hold on us ! 
 We realize , of course , that “ the whole world is lying in the power of [ that ] wicked one . ” 
 So the Devil could offer Jesus “ all the kingdoms of the world ” for one apostate act of worship ​ — something unequivocally rejected by God’s Son . 
 The world ruled by Satan hates Christ’s followers . 
 No wonder the apostle John warned us not to love the world ! 
 John wrote : “ Do not be loving either the world or the things in the world . 
 If anyone loves the world , the love of the Father is not in him ; because everything in the world ​ — the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the showy display of one’s means of life — ​ does not originate with the Father , but originates with the world . 
 Furthermore , the world is passing away and so is its desire , but he that does the will of God remains forever . ” 
 We must not love the world , for its way of life appeals to the sinful flesh and is diametrically opposed to Jehovah God’s standards . 
 What if love of this world exists in our heart ? 
 Then let us pray for God’s help to overcome this love and the fleshly desires associated with it . 
 Surely we will strive to keep ourselves “ without spot from the world ” if we bear in mind that “ wicked spirit forces ” are the invisible “ world rulers ” over unrighteous human society . ​ — James 1 : 27 ; Ephesians 6 : 11 , 12 ; 2 Corinthians 4 : 4 . 
 Why can it be said that we are “ no part of the world ” ? 
 Regarding his disciples , Jesus said : “ They are no part of the world , just as I am no part of the world . ” 
 Anointed Christians and their dedicated companions strive to keep morally and spiritually clean , separate from this world . 
 This unrighteous world hates us because we keep separate from it and are ‘ preachers of righteousness . ’ 
 True , we live in the midst of human society , which includes fornicators , adulterers , extortioners , idolaters , thieves , liars , and drunkards . 
 But we do not breathe in “ the spirit of the world , ” for we are not driven by this sinful motivating force . ​ — 1 Corinthians 2 : 12 . 
 Allow No Place for the Devil 
 21 , 22 . 
 How can you apply Paul’s counsel recorded at Ephesians 4 : 26 , 27 ? 
 Instead of being motivated by “ the spirit of the world , ” we are led by God’s spirit , which produces in us such qualities as love and self - control . 
 These assist us in withstanding the Devil’s assaults on our faith . 
 He wants us to become “ heated up only to do evil , ” but God’s spirit helps us to “ let anger alone and leave rage . ” 
 True , we may at times become justifiably angry , but Paul counsels us : “ Be wrathful , and yet do not sin ; let the sun not set with you in a provoked state , neither allow place for the Devil . ” ​ — Ephesians 4 : 26 , 27 . 
 Our anger could result in sin if we remained in a provoked state . 
 Our having this frame of mind would give the Devil a chance to promote discord in the congregation or incite us to engage in evil deeds . 
 Hence , we need quickly to settle differences with others in a godly way . 
 Let us , therefore , be guided by God’s spirit , exercising self - control and never letting even justifiable anger degenerate into bitterness , malice , and hatred . 
 What questions will we consider in the next article ? 
 We have discussed certain traits of the Devil that we should not imitate . 
 But some readers may wonder : Should we fear Satan ? 
 Why does he foment the persecution of Christians ? 
 And how can we avoid being overreached by the Devil ? 
 [ Footnote ] 
 See the cover series “ Is the Devil Real ? ” 
 in The Watchtower of November 15 , 2005 . 
 What Is Your Reply ? 
 • Why should we never slander anyone ? 
 • In keeping with 1 John 3 : 15 , how can we avoid being manslayers ? 
 • How should we view apostates , and why ? 
 • Why should we not love the world ? 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 We will never allow the Devil to destroy our Christian unity 
 [ Pictures on page 24 ] 
 Why did John urge us not to love the world ? 
 Oppose Satan , and He Will Flee ! 
 “ Subject yourselves . . . to God ; but oppose the Devil , and he will flee from you . ” ​ — JAMES 4 : 7 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) What trait of the Devil is reflected in a declaration recorded in Isaiah chapter 14 ? 
 ( b ) We will discuss what questions ? 
 THE Devil is the epitome of arrogance . 
 His pride is reflected in words recorded by God’s prophet Isaiah . 
 Over a century before Babylonia became the chief world power , Jehovah’s people were represented as making this declaration against “ the king of Babylon ” : “ You have said in your heart , ‘ To the heavens I shall go up . 
 Above the stars of God [ kings of David’s royal line ] I shall lift up my throne . . . 
 I shall make myself resemble the Most High . ’ ” 
 The pride of “ the king of Babylon ” was similar to the spirit of Satan , “ the god of this system of things . ” 
 But Satan’s arrogance will end in disaster , even as the Babylonian dynasty came to an inglorious end . 
 As long as the Devil exists , however , we may be concerned about such questions as these : Should we fear Satan ? 
 Why does he incite people to persecute Christians ? 
 How can we avoid being overreached by the Devil ? 
 Should We Fear the Devil ? 
 3 , 4 . 
 Why are anointed Christians and their companions not afraid of the Devil ? 
 Very strengthening to anointed Christians are these words of Jesus Christ : “ Do not be afraid of the things you are about to suffer . 
 Look ! 
 The Devil will keep on throwing some of you into prison that you may be fully put to the test , and that you may have tribulation ten days . 
 Prove yourself faithful even to death , and I will give you the crown of life . ” 
 Anointed ones and their companions with an earthly hope are not afraid of the Devil . 
 This lack of fear does not stem from inherent courage . 
 It exists because they have reverential fear of God and ‘ take refuge in the shadow of his wings . ’ ​ — Psalm 34 : 9 ; 36 : 7 . 
 Fearless early disciples of Jesus Christ proved faithful to death despite the things they suffered . 
 They did not succumb to fear of what Satan the Devil could do , for they knew that Jehovah would never abandon those who proved loyal to Him . 
 Similarly , in the face of intense present - day persecution , anointed Christians and their dedicated associates are determined not to break their integrity to God . 
 However , the apostle Paul indicated that the Devil could cause death . 
 Should that not make us fearful ? 
 What do we learn from Hebrews 2 : 14 , 15 ? 
 Paul said that Jesus ‘ partook of blood and flesh ’ that “ through his death he might bring to nothing the one having the means to cause death , that is , the Devil ; and that he might emancipate all those who for fear of death were subject to slavery all through their lives . ” 
 As “ the one having the means to cause death , ” Satan got control of Judas Iscariot and then used the Jewish leaders and the Romans to execute Jesus . 
 Through his sacrificial death , however , Jesus frees sinful mankind from Satan’s grip and makes it possible for us to have everlasting life . ​ — John 3 : 16 . 
 6 , 7 . 
 To what extent does Satan have the means to cause death ? 
 To what extent does the Devil have the means to cause death ? 
 Well , from the start of Satan’s career of wickedness , his lies and leadings have caused death among humans . 
 This is because Adam sinned and thus passed sin and death on to the human family . 
 In addition , Satan’s earthly servants have persecuted worshippers of Jehovah , sometimes to the point of death , even as they did in the case of Jesus Christ . 
 Nevertheless , we should not think that the Devil can cause the death of any individual whom he wants to kill . 
 God protects those belonging to Him and will never permit Satan to wipe out all true worshippers on earth . 
 True , Jehovah allows persecution to come upon all his people , and he permits death to come to some of us as a result of the Devil’s assaults . 
 Yet , the Scriptures hold out the wonderful hope of a resurrection for those in God’s “ book of remembrance ” ​ — and the Devil can do absolutely nothing to prevent such restoration of life ! ​ — Malachi 3 : 16 ; John 5 : 28 , 29 ; Acts 24 : 15 . 
 Why the Satanic Persecution ? 
 Why does the Devil bring persecution upon God’s servants ? 
 If we are loyal servants of God , there is a basic reason why the Devil brings persecution upon us . 
 His objective is to cause us to compromise our faith . 
 We have a precious relationship with our heavenly Father , and Satan desires to destroy it . 
 This should not surprise us . 
 In Eden , Jehovah foretold that there would be enmity between his symbolic “ woman ” and the “ serpent ” and between their respective ‘ seeds . ’ 
 The Scriptures identify the Devil as “ the original serpent ” and reveal that his time is now short and his anger great . 
 As enmity between the two ‘ seeds ’ continues , those faithfully serving Jehovah can expect to be persecuted . 
 Are you aware of the underlying reason for such satanic persecution ? 
 9 , 10 . 
 The Devil has raised what issue , and how is the conduct of humans related to it ? 
 The Devil has raised the issue of universal sovereignty . 
 Related to it , he has called into question the integrity of humans to their Creator . 
 Satan brought persecution upon the upright man Job . 
 Why ? 
 In order to break Job’s integrity to Jehovah . 
 Job’s wife and his three “ troublesome comforters ” served the Devil’s purpose at that time . 
 As shown in the book of Job , the Devil challenged God , claiming that no human would remain faithful to Him if Satan were allowed to test that person . 
 But Job held fast his integrity , thus proving Satan a liar . 
 The Devil persecutes Witnesses of Jehovah today in an effort to break their integrity and prove his challenge true . 
 Knowing that the Devil brings persecution upon us because he desperately wants to break our integrity to God can actually help us to be courageous and strong . 
 Our God is the Universal Sovereign , and he will help us to maintain our integrity . 
 May we always seek to make Jehovah’s heart rejoice by being integrity keepers , giving him a reply to the great taunter , Satan the Devil . ​ — Proverbs 27 : 11 . 
 “ Deliver Us From the Wicked One ” 
 What is meant by the request , “ Do not bring us into temptation ” ? 
 Being an integrity - keeper is not a simple matter ; it calls for earnest prayer . 
 Especially helpful are the words of the model prayer . 
 In part , Jesus said : “ Do not bring us into temptation , but deliver us from the wicked one . ” 
 Jehovah does not tempt us to sin . 
 However , the Scriptures sometimes speak of his doing or causing things , when he , in fact , merely permits them . 
 By praying as Jesus indicated , then , we are asking Jehovah not to abandon us to temptation . 
 And he will not do so , for we have this Scriptural assurance : “ God is faithful , and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear , but along with the temptation he will also make the way out in order for you to be able to endure it . ” ​ — 1 Corinthians 10 : 13 . 
 Why do we pray : “ Deliver us from the wicked one ” ? 
 After mentioning temptation in the model prayer , Jesus appropriately said : “ Deliver us from the wicked one . ” 
 Some Bible translations read : “ Deliver us from evil ” ( King James Version ; Revised Standard Version ) or “ Protect us from evil . ” 
 ( Contemporary English Version ) In the Scriptures , however , the expression ‘ deliver from ’ is used chiefly with regard to people , and Matthew’s Gospel refers to the Devil as “ the Tempter , ” a person . 
 So it is important to pray for deliverance from “ the wicked one , ” Satan the Devil . 
 He tries to maneuver us into sinning against God . 
 When we make the request , “ Deliver us from the wicked one , ” we are asking our heavenly Father to guide and help us so that we are not overreached by the Devil . 
 Do Not Be Overreached by the Devil 
 13 , 14 . 
 Why did the Corinthians need to change the way they dealt with a man in the congregation who had been immoral ? 
 When Paul urged Christians in Corinth to be forgiving , he wrote : “ Anything you kindly forgive anyone , I do too . 
 In fact , as for me , whatever I have kindly forgiven , if I have kindly forgiven anything , it has been for your sakes in Christ’s sight ; that we may not be overreached by Satan , for we are not ignorant of his designs . ” 
 The Devil can overreach us in various ways , but why did Paul make the statement just quoted ? 
 Paul had reproved the Corinthians because they allowed an immoral man to remain in the congregation . 
 This must have delighted Satan , for reproach fell upon the congregation for tolerating “ such fornication as is not even among the nations . ” 
 Eventually , the wrongdoer was disfellowshipped . 
 The man later repented . 
 If the Corinthians refused to forgive and reinstate that man , the Devil would overreach them in another way . 
 How so ? 
 They would be harsh and merciless , like Satan himself . 
 If the repentant man became “ swallowed up by his being overly sad ” and gave up entirely , especially would the elders bear some responsibility for this before the merciful God , Jehovah . 
 Of course , no true Christian would want to imitate Satan by being cruel , harsh , and merciless . 
 Protected by Armor From God 
 What warfare do we wage , and on what does victory depend ? 
 If we are to be delivered from the Devil , we must wage spiritual warfare against the wicked spirit forces . 
 Victory in the face of such odds depends on our wearing “ the complete suit of armor from God . ” 
 This armor includes “ the breastplate of righteousness . ” 
 King Saul of ancient Israel disobeyed God and suffered the loss of holy spirit . 
 But if we practice righteousness and have on the full suit of spiritual armor , we will have God’s holy spirit and the needed protection against Satan and his wicked angels , the demons . ​ — Proverbs 18 : 10 . 
 How can we have continued protection against the wicked spirit forces ? 
 For continued protection against the wicked spirit forces , we need , among other things , to read and study God’s Word regularly , making good use of publications provided through “ the faithful steward . ” 
 We will thus be filling our mind with wholesome spiritual matters , in harmony with Paul’s counsel : “ Brothers , whatever things are true , whatever things are of serious concern , whatever things are righteous , whatever things are chaste , whatever things are lovable , whatever things are well spoken of , whatever virtue there is and whatever praiseworthy thing there is , continue considering these things . ” ​ — Philippians 4 : 8 . 
 What will help us to be effective proclaimers of the good news ? 
 Jehovah enables us to have our “ feet shod with the equipment of the good news of peace . ” 
 Regular participation in Christian meetings equips us to proclaim the good news of God’s Kingdom . 
 What joy we derive from helping others to learn God’s truth and experience spiritual freedom ! 
 “ The sword of the spirit , that is , God’s word , ” is indispensable in warding off false teachings and “ overturning strongly entrenched things . ” 
 Deft use of God’s written Word , the Bible , helps us to teach the truth and safeguards us from succumbing to the Devil’s wiles . 
 How can we “ stand firm against the machinations of the Devil ” ? 
 Paul opened his discussion of our spiritual armor by saying : “ Go on acquiring power in the Lord and in the mightiness of his strength . 
 Put on the complete suit of armor from God that you may be able to stand firm against the machinations [ “ crafty acts , ” footnote ] of the Devil . ” 
 The Greek word rendered “ stand firm ” relates to a soldier’s holding his position . 
 We stand our ground in spiritual warfare , although Satan uses various crafty means in his efforts to disrupt our unity , corrupt our teachings , or break our integrity to God . 
 But the Devil’s assaults have not succeeded so far ​ — and they never will ! 
 * 
 Oppose the Devil , and He Will Flee 
 What is one way to go on the offensive in opposing the Devil ? 
 We can be successful in our spiritual warfare against the Devil and the wicked spirit forces under his direction . 
 There is no reason to quake in fear of Satan , for the disciple James wrote : “ Subject yourselves . . . to God ; but oppose the Devil , and he will flee from you . ” 
 One way to go on the offensive in opposing Satan and the wicked spirit creatures in league with him is by having nothing to do with occult or magical practices and those indulging in them . 
 The Scriptures clearly show that servants of Jehovah must refuse to look for omens or to engage in astrology , divination , and spiritism . 
 If we are spiritually active and strong , we need not be afraid that someone will cast a spell on us . ​ — Numbers 23 : 23 ; Deuteronomy 18 : 10 - 12 ; Isaiah 47 : 12 - 15 ; Acts 19 : 18 - 20 . 
 How can we oppose the Devil ? 
 We “ oppose the Devil ” by adhering to Bible standards and truths and by taking a firm stand against him . 
 The world is in harmony with Satan because he is its god . 
 We therefore reject the world’s traits , such as pride , selfishness , immorality , violence , and materialism . 
 We know that the Devil fled when Jesus resisted his attack by using the Scriptures during the temptation in the wilderness . 
 Likewise , Satan will ‘ flee from us ’ in defeat if we are in full submission to Jehovah and prayerfully rely on Him . 
 With the support of Jehovah God and his beloved Son , nobody can do us permanent harm ​ — no , not even the Devil ! ​ — Psalm 91 : 9 - 11 . 
 [ Footnote ] 
 For further information on the spiritual armor from God , see The Watchtower , May 15 , 1992 , pages 21 - 3 . 
 What Is Your Reply ? 
 • Should we fear Satan the Devil ? 
 • Why does Satan bring persecution upon Christians ? 
 • Why do we pray to be delivered from “ the wicked one ” ? 
 • How can we be successful in waging spiritual warfare ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 Fearless early followers of Christ proved faithful to death 
 [ Picture on page 27 ] 
 The Devil cannot prevent the resurrection of those who are in Jehovah’s memory 
 [ Picture on page 28 ] 
 Do you pray for deliverance from “ the wicked one ” ? 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 Are you wearing “ the complete suit of armor from God ” ? 
 Imitate the Patience of Jehovah 
 “ Jehovah is not slow respecting his promise , . . . but he is patient . ” ​ — 2 PETER 3 : 9 . 
 What incomparable gift has Jehovah offered humans ? 
 JEHOVAH has offered us something that no one else can offer . 
 It is something immensely appealing and precious , yet it can be neither purchased nor earned . 
 What he offers is the gift of everlasting life ​ — for most of us , endless life on a paradise earth . 
 What a delight that will be ! 
 Gone will be the things that cause so much sorrow ​ — strife , violence , poverty , crime , sickness , and even death . 
 People will live in perfect peace and unity under the loving rule of God’s Kingdom . 
 How we yearn for that Paradise ! ​ — Isaiah 9 : 6 , 7 ; Revelation 21 : 4 , 5 . 
 Why has Jehovah not yet removed Satan’s system of things ? 
 Jehovah too looks forward to the time when he will establish Paradise on earth . 
 After all , he is a lover of righteousness and justice . 
 It gives him no pleasure to gaze upon a world indifferent or hostile to his righteous principles , a world that spurns his authority and abuses his people . 
 Yet , there are good reasons why he has not yet acted to remove Satan’s wicked system of things . 
 Those reasons have to do with moral issues involving his sovereignty . 
 In settling these issues , Jehovah displays a particularly appealing quality , a quality that many today lack ​ — patience . 
 ( a ) What is the meaning of the Greek and Hebrew words translated “ patience ” in the Bible ? 
 ( b ) What questions will we now consider ? 
 There is a Greek word that in the New World Translation is three times rendered “ patience . ” 
 It literally means “ longness of spirit ” and thus is frequently rendered “ long - suffering ” and once “ exercising of patience . ” 
 Inherent in both the Greek and Hebrew words for “ patience ” is the thought of forbearance and slowness to anger . 
 How does Jehovah’s patience benefit us ? 
 What lessons are to be learned from the patience and endurance of Jehovah and of his faithful servants ? 
 How do we know that Jehovah’s patience is not limitless ? 
 Let us see . 
 Consider Jehovah’s Patience 
 Concerning Jehovah’s patience , what did the apostle Peter write ? 
 Concerning Jehovah’s patience , the apostle Peter wrote : “ Let this one fact not be escaping your notice , beloved ones , that one day is with Jehovah as a thousand years and a thousand years as one day . 
 Jehovah is not slow respecting his promise , as some people consider slowness , but he is patient with you because he does not desire any to be destroyed but desires all to attain to repentance . ” 
 Please notice two points expressed here that can help us to understand Jehovah’s patience . 
 How does Jehovah’s view of time affect his actions ? 
 The first point is that Jehovah does not view time as we do . 
 To the One who lives forever , a thousand years are as one day . 
 He is not restrained or pressured by time , but he is not slow in acting . 
 Possessing limitless wisdom , Jehovah knows precisely the best time to act for the benefit of all concerned , and he patiently waits for that time to come . 
 However , we should not conclude that Jehovah is insensitive to any suffering that his servants may experience in the meantime . 
 He is a God of “ tender compassion , ” the personification of love . 
 He is able to undo , completely and permanently , any harm that this temporary permission of suffering might have caused . ​ — Psalm 37 : 10 . 
 What should we not conclude about God , and why ? 
 It is , of course , not easy to wait for something that one yearns for . 
 Thus , when people do not swiftly fulfill their promises , others may conclude that they do not intend to do so . 
 How unwise it would be to think that of God ! 
 If we mistake God’s patience for slowness , the passing of time can easily cause us to give way to doubt and discouragement , and we risk becoming spiritually drowsy . 
 Even worse , we might be misled by those whom Peter earlier warned against ​ — ridiculers , those without faith . 
 Such ones mockingly say : “ Where is this promised presence of his ? 
 Why , from the day our forefathers fell asleep in death , all things are continuing exactly as from creation’s beginning . ” ​ — 2 Peter 3 : 4 . 
 How is Jehovah’s patience related to his desire that people repent ? 
 A second point that we can draw from Peter’s words is that Jehovah is patient because he desires all to attain to repentance . 
 Those who stubbornly refuse to turn back from their bad ways face execution at the hand of Jehovah . 
 However , God finds no pleasure in the death of the wicked one . 
 Rather , he delights to see people repent , turn back from their bad ways , and keep living . 
 Consequently , he is exercising patience and is having the good news declared in all the earth so that people may have every opportunity to live . 
 How is God’s patience seen in his dealings with the nation of Israel ? 
 The patience of God is also seen in his dealings with the ancient nation of Israel . 
 For centuries , he put up with their disobedience . 
 By means of his prophets , time and again he urged them : “ Turn back from your bad ways and keep my commandments , my statutes , according to all the law that I commanded your forefathers and that I have sent to you by means of my servants the prophets . ” 
 What was the result ? 
 Regrettably , the people “ did not listen . ” ​ — 2 Kings 17 : 13 , 14 . 
 How did Jesus ’ patience mirror that of his Father ? 
 Finally , Jehovah sent his Son , who tirelessly appealed to the Jews to become reconciled to God . 
 Jesus ’ patience perfectly mirrored that of his Father . 
 With full knowledge that he was soon to be put to death , Jesus lamented : “ Jerusalem , Jerusalem , the killer of the prophets and stoner of those sent forth to her , ​ — how often I wanted to gather your children together , the way a hen gathers her chicks together under her wings ! 
 But you people did not want it . ” 
 These poignant words are not those of a stern judge who is eager to punish someone but those of a loving friend who is patient with people . 
 Jesus , like his Father in heaven , wanted the people to repent and escape adverse judgment . 
 Some did respond favorably to the warnings of Jesus and escaped the terrible judgment that came upon Jerusalem in 70 C.E . ​ — Luke 21 : 20 - 22 . 
 In what way has the patience of God benefited us ? 
 Is not the patience of God something to marvel at ? 
 In spite of the magnitude of human disobedience , Jehovah has allowed each one of us , along with millions of other people , the opportunity to come to know him and to embrace the hope of salvation . 
 “ Consider the patience of our Lord as salvation , ” wrote Peter to fellow Christians . 
 Are we not grateful that Jehovah’s patience has opened the way to salvation for us ? 
 Do we not pray that Jehovah may continue to be patient with us as we serve him day by day ? ​ — Matthew 6 : 12 . 
 What will an understanding of Jehovah’s patience move us to do ? 
 When we understand why Jehovah is patient , we are helped to wait patiently for the salvation he will bring , never concluding that he is slow in fulfilling his promises . 
 While we continue to pray for God’s Kingdom to come , we trust that God knows the best time to answer that prayer . 
 Further , we are moved to imitate Jehovah by showing godly patience in our dealings with our brothers and with those to whom we preach . 
 We too do not desire any to be destroyed but would like to see them repent and share our hope of everlasting life . ​ — 1 Timothy 2 : 3 , 4 . 
 Consider the Patience of the Prophets 
 12 , 13 . 
 In line with James 5 : 10 , how did the prophet Isaiah successfully exercise patience ? 
 By considering the patience of Jehovah , we are helped both to appreciate and to cultivate that quality . 
 It is not easy for imperfect humans to cultivate patience , but it can be done . 
 We learn from God’s servants of old . 
 The disciple James wrote : “ Brothers , take as a pattern of the suffering of evil and the exercising of patience the prophets , who spoke in the name of Jehovah . ” 
 It is comforting and encouraging to know that others have successfully faced what we have to face . 
 The prophet Isaiah , for example , certainly needed patience in his assignment . 
 Jehovah said as much by telling him : “ Go , and you must say to this people , ‘ Hear again and again , O men , but do not understand ; and see again and again , but do not get any knowledge . ’ 
 Make the heart of this people unreceptive , and make their very ears unresponsive , and paste their very eyes together , that they may not see with their eyes and with their ears they may not hear , and that their own heart may not understand and that they may not actually turn back and get healing for themselves . ” 
 Despite the unresponsiveness of the people , Isaiah patiently declared Jehovah’s warning messages for no less than 46 years ! 
 In like manner , patience will help us to endure in our work of preaching the good news , even though many are unreceptive . 
 14 , 15 . 
 What helped Jeremiah to cope with adversities and discouragement ? 
 Of course , as the prophets carried out their ministry , they had to cope with more than unresponsiveness ; they suffered evil . 
 Jeremiah was put in stocks , imprisoned in “ the house of fetters , ” and thrown into a cistern . 
 He suffered this abuse at the hands of the very people whom he wished to help . 
 Yet , Jeremiah did not become bitter , nor did he retaliate . 
 He patiently endured for decades . 
 Persecution and ridicule did not silence Jeremiah , and they do not silence us today . 
 Of course , we may feel discouraged at times . 
 Jeremiah felt discouraged . 
 “ The word of Jehovah became for me a cause for reproach and for jeering all day long , ” he wrote . 
 “ And I said : ‘ I am not going to make mention of him , and I shall speak no more in his name . ’ ” 
 What happened then ? 
 Did Jeremiah stop preaching ? 
 He continued : “ In my heart [ the word of God ] proved to be like a burning fire shut up in my bones ; and I got tired of holding in , and I was unable to endure it . ” 
 Notice that when he focused on the ridicule of the people , he lost his joy . 
 When he turned his attention to the beauty and importance of the message itself , his joy was rekindled . 
 Moreover , Jehovah was with Jeremiah “ like a terrible mighty one , ” strengthening him to proclaim the word of God with zeal and boldness . ​ — Jeremiah 20 : 11 . 
 How can we maintain joy in our work of preaching the good news ? 
 Did the prophet Jeremiah find joy in his work ? 
 Absolutely ! 
 He said to Jehovah : “ Your words were found , and I proceeded to eat them ; and your word becomes to me the exultation and the rejoicing of my heart ; for your name has been called upon me , O Jehovah . ” 
 Jeremiah rejoiced in his privilege of representing the true God and preaching his word . 
 We too can rejoice . 
 What is more , we rejoice , as do the angels in heaven , that worldwide so many accept the Kingdom message , repent , and get on the road to everlasting life . ​ — Luke 15 : 10 . 
 “ The Endurance of Job ” 
 17 , 18 . 
 In what way did Job endure , and what was the outcome ? 
 After commenting about the prophets of old , the disciple James wrote : “ You have heard of the endurance of Job and have seen the outcome Jehovah gave , that Jehovah is very tender in affection and merciful . ” 
 The Greek word here translated “ endurance ” has a meaning similar to that of the word James used in the preceding verse for “ patience . ” 
 Pointing out the difference between the two words , one scholar wrote : “ The former is patience when persons abuse us , the latter is brave perseverance under things that distress us . ” 
 Job experienced profound distress . 
 He suffered financial ruin , the loss of his children , and a painful disease . 
 He also grappled with false charges that Jehovah was punishing him . 
 Job did not suffer in silence ; he lamented his situation and even implied that he was more righteous than God . 
 However , he never lost faith , nor did he break his integrity . 
 He did not curse God as Satan said he would . 
 The outcome ? 
 Jehovah “ blessed the end of Job afterward more than his beginning . ” 
 Jehovah restored Job’s health , doubled his wealth , and blessed him with a full , happy life with his loved ones . 
 Job’s faithful endurance also enabled him to understand Jehovah more fully . 
 What do we learn from the patient endurance of Job ? 
 What do we learn from the patient endurance of Job ? 
 Like Job , we may suffer sickness or other hardships . 
 We may not fully understand why Jehovah allows us to undergo a particular trial . 
 Yet , of this we may be sure : If we remain faithful , we will be blessed . 
 Jehovah without fail rewards those earnestly seeking him . 
 Jesus said : “ He that has endured to the end is the one that will be saved . ” ​ — Matthew 10 : 22 ; 24 : 13 . 
 “ Jehovah’s Day Will Come ” 
 Why can we be certain that Jehovah’s day will come ? 
 Though Jehovah is patient , he is also just and will not forever tolerate wickedness . 
 There are limits to his patience . 
 Wrote Peter : “ [ God ] did not hold back from punishing an ancient world . ” 
 While Noah and his family were preserved alive , that ungodly world was deluged with water . 
 Jehovah also brought judgment upon Sodom and Gomorrah , reducing them to ashes . 
 These judgments set “ a pattern for ungodly persons of things to come . ” 
 Of this , we may be certain : “ Jehovah’s day will come . ” ​ — 2 Peter 2 : 5 , 6 ; 3 : 10 . 
 How might we demonstrate our patience and endurance , and what subject will we consider in the next article ? 
 Let us , then , imitate the patience of Jehovah by assisting others to attain to repentance so that they might be saved . 
 Let us also imitate the prophets by patiently declaring the good news despite the unresponsiveness of those to whom we preach . 
 Further , we can be sure that Jehovah will bless us richly if , like Job , we endure trials and maintain integrity . 
 There is every reason to rejoice in our ministry when we note how Jehovah’s rich blessing has been on the efforts of his people to preach the good news throughout all the earth . 
 This we shall see in the next article . 
 Do You Remember ? 
 • Why does Jehovah show patience ? 
 • What do we learn from the patience of the prophets ? 
 • How did Job display endurance , and what was the outcome ? 
 • How do we know that Jehovah’s patience is not without limits ? 
 [ Picture on page 18 ] 
 Jesus ’ patience perfectly mirrored that of his Father 
 [ Pictures on page 20 ] 
 How did Jehovah reward Jeremiah’s patience ? 
 [ Pictures on page 21 ] 
 How did Jehovah reward Job’s endurance ? 
 “ A Witness to All the Nations ” 
 “ You will be witnesses of me . . . to the most distant part of the earth . ” ​ — ACTS 1 : 8 . 
 When and where did the disciples first hear the prophecy recorded at Matthew 24 : 14 ? 
 JESUS ’ words recorded at Matthew 24 : 14 are so familiar that many of us know them by heart . 
 And what a truly remarkable prophecy it is ! 
 Imagine what the disciples must have thought when they first heard it ! 
 The year was 33 C.E . 
 The disciples had been with Jesus for about three years , and now they had come with him to Jerusalem . 
 They had seen his miracles and had listened to his teachings . 
 Though they delighted in the precious truths that Jesus had taught them , they were well - aware that not all shared their delight . 
 Jesus had powerful and influential enemies . 
 What dangers and challenges would the disciples face ? 
 On the Mount of Olives , four disciples sat with Jesus , listening intently as he spoke of the coming dangers and challenges that they would face . 
 Earlier , Jesus had told them that he would be killed . 
 Now he made it clear that they too would experience brutal opposition . 
 “ People will deliver you up to tribulation and will kill you , ” he said . 
 “ And you will be objects of hatred by all the nations on account of my name . ” 
 That was not all . 
 False prophets would mislead many . 
 Others would be stumbled and would betray and hate one another . 
 Still others , in fact “ the greater number , ” would allow their love for God and for his Word to cool off . ​ — Matthew 24 : 9 - 12 . 
 Why are Jesus ’ words found at Matthew 24 : 14 truly stunning ? 
 It was against such a negative backdrop that Jesus made a statement that must have caused the disciples to marvel . 
 He said : “ This good news of the kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth for a witness to all the nations ; and then the end will come . ” 
 Yes , the work that Jesus began in Israel ​ — to “ bear witness to the truth ” — ​ would continue and expand to global proportions . 
 What a truly stunning prophecy ! 
 To extend that work to “ all the nations ” would be challenging ; to do so in the face of “ hatred by all the nations ” would be nothing short of miraculous . 
 The accomplishment of this immense task would magnify not only Jehovah’s supremacy and power but also his love , mercy , and patience . 
 In addition , it would give his servants an opportunity to show their faith and devotion . 
 Who were told to carry out the work of witnessing , and what comfort did Jesus impart ? 
 Jesus left his disciples in no doubt that they had on their hands a monumental work . 
 Before his ascension to heaven , Jesus appeared to them and said : “ You will receive power when the holy spirit arrives upon you , and you will be witnesses of me both in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria and to the most distant part of the earth . ” 
 Of course , others would soon join them . 
 Still , the disciples were few in number . 
 How comforting it must have been to know that God’s powerful holy spirit would empower them to accomplish this divine assignment ! 
 What did the disciples not know about the witnessing work ? 
 The disciples knew that they were to preach the good news and “ make disciples of people of all the nations . ” 
 But they did not know how thorough a witness would be given , and they did not know when the end would come . 
 Neither do we . 
 These are matters for Jehovah alone to determine . 
 When the witness is given to Jehovah’s satisfaction , he will bring an end to this wicked system of things . 
 Only then will Christians discern that the preaching work has been accomplished to the extent Jehovah purposed . 
 Those early disciples could hardly have envisioned the magnitude of the witness that would be given in this time of the end . 
 The Witness in the First Century 
 What happened at Pentecost 33 C.E . and shortly thereafter ? 
 In the first century , the Kingdom - preaching and disciple - making work produced astounding results . 
 On the day of Pentecost 33 C.E . , about 120 disciples were in an upper room in Jerusalem . 
 God’s holy spirit was poured out upon them , the apostle Peter gave a stirring talk explaining the meaning of this miracle , and some 3,000 became believers and were baptized . 
 That was only the beginning . 
 Despite the determined efforts by religious leaders to crush the preaching of the good news , “ Jehovah continued to join to [ the disciples ] daily those being saved . ” 
 Soon , “ the number of the men became about five thousand . ” 
 After that , “ believers in the Lord kept on being added , multitudes both of men and of women . ” ​ — Acts 2 : 1 - 4 , 8 , 14 , 41 , 47 ; 4 : 4 ; 5 : 14 . 
 Why was the conversion of Cornelius a significant development ? 
 The year 36 C.E . saw another significant development ​ — the conversion and baptism of Cornelius , a Gentile . 
 In directing the apostle Peter to this God - fearing man , Jehovah indicated that Jesus ’ command to “ make disciples of people of all the nations ” was not limited to Jews in various lands . 
 What was the reaction of those taking the lead ? 
 When the apostles and older men in Judaea discerned that the good news was also to be taken to those of the nations ​ — non - Jews — ​ they glorified God . 
 Meanwhile , the preaching work continued to bear fruit among the Jews . 
 Some years later , possibly about 58 C.E . , there were in addition to Gentile believers “ many thousands of [ Jewish ] believers . ” ​ — Acts 21 : 20 . 
 How does the good news affect individuals ? 
 Though numerical increase among first - century Christians is impressive , never should we forget the individuals whom the figures represent . 
 The Biblical message they heard was powerful . 
 It dramatically changed the lives of those embracing it . 
 Individuals cleaned up their lives , put on the new personality , and became reconciled to God . 
 The same is true today . 
 And those accepting the good news all have the marvelous prospect of living eternally . ​ — John 3 : 16 . 
 Fellow Workers With God 
 What privilege and responsibility did the early Christians recognize that they had ? 
 The early Christians did not take credit for what was being accomplished . 
 They recognized that their work as ministers was supported by “ power of holy spirit . ” 
 Jehovah was the one responsible for spiritual growth . 
 At the same time , those Christians knew that they had the privilege and responsibility of being “ God’s fellow workers . ” 
 Consequently , in harmony with Jesus ’ admonition , they exerted themselves vigorously in the work they were assigned to do . ​ — Luke 13 : 24 . 
 What efforts did some early Christians make to give a witness to all nations ? 
 As “ an apostle to the nations , ” Paul journeyed thousands of miles on land and sea , establishing many congregations in the Roman province of Asia and in Greece . 
 He also traveled to Rome and possibly even to Spain . 
 Meanwhile , the apostle Peter , entrusted with “ the good news . . . for those who [ were ] circumcised , ” traveled in the other direction to serve in Babylon , an important center of Judaism at that time . 
 Among the many others who labored in the work of the Lord were such women as Tryphaena and Tryphosa . 
 Another woman , named Persis , is said to have “ performed many labors in the Lord . ” ​ — Romans 16 : 12 . 
 How did Jehovah bless the efforts of the disciples ? 
 Jehovah richly blessed the efforts of those and other zealous workers . 
 Less than 30 years after Jesus foretold that there would be a witness to all the nations , Paul wrote that the “ good news ” had been “ preached in all creation that is under heaven . ” 
 Did the end then come ? 
 In a sense , yes . 
 It came upon the Jewish system of things in the year 70 C.E . when Roman armies destroyed Jerusalem along with the temple . 
 Yet , Jehovah had determined that a far greater witness would be given before he would bring an end to Satan’s global system of things . 
 The Witness Given Today 
 How did the early Bible Students understand the command to preach ? 
 During the latter part of the 19th century , after a long period when religious apostasy prevailed , pure worship was reestablished . 
 The Bible Students , as Jehovah’s Witnesses were then known , well understood the command to make disciples in all the earth . 
 By the year 1914 , there were about 5,100 who actively participated in the preaching activity , and the good news had reached some 68 lands . 
 However , those early Bible Students did not grasp the full significance of Matthew 24 : 14 . 
 By the late 19th century , the Bible , which contains the good news , or gospel , had been translated and printed by Bible societies in many languages and distributed around the world . 
 Thus , for some decades , the Bible Students reasoned that a witness to the nations had already been given . 
 13 , 14 . 
 What clearer understanding of God’s will and purpose was presented in a 1928 issue of The Watch Tower ? 
 Gradually , Jehovah gave his people a clearer understanding of his will and purpose . 
 The Watch Tower of December 1 , 1928 , said : “ Can we say that [ the ] circulation of the Bible accomplished the foretold preaching of the gospel of the kingdom ? 
 Decidedly no ! 
 In spite of this Bible distribution it is still necessary for God’s little band of witnesses in the earth to print literature explaining God’s [ purpose ] and to call upon the homes where these Bibles have been placed . 
 Otherwise the people would be left in ignorance as to the setting up of the Messianic government in our day . ” 
 That issue of The Watch Tower further stated : “ In 1920 , . . . 
 Bible Students came to a correct understanding of our Lord’s prophecy contained in Matthew 24 : 14 . 
 They then realized that ‘ this gospel ’ which was to be preached in all the world for a testimony to the Gentiles or all nations , was not a gospel of a kingdom yet to come but a gospel to the effect that the Messianic King has begun his reign over earth . ” 
 How has the witnessing work expanded since the 1920 ’ s ? 
 That “ little band of witnesses ” in the 1920 ’ s did not remain little . 
 In the decades to come , “ a great crowd ” of “ other sheep ” was identified and began to be gathered . 
 Today , there are 6,613,950 proclaimers of the good news in 235 lands of the earth . 
 What a marvelous fulfillment of prophecy ! 
 Never before has “ this good news of the kingdom ” been preached on such a large scale . 
 Never before have there been so many faithful servants of Jehovah on earth . 
 What was accomplished in the past service year ? 
 ( See chart on pages 27 - 30 . ) 
 Together , this vast throng of Witnesses have been busy during the 2005 service year . 
 Over a billion hours were spent in proclaiming the good news in 235 lands . 
 Millions of return visits were made , and millions of Bible studies were conducted . 
 This work has been accomplished by Jehovah’s Witnesses , who have freely given of their time and resources to share God’s Word with others . 
 By means of his powerful holy spirit , Jehovah continues to empower his servants to accomplish his will . ​ — Zechariah 4 : 6 . 
 Working Hard to Give a Witness 
 How are Jehovah’s people responding to Jesus ’ words about preaching the good news ? 
 Though nearly 2,000 years have passed since Jesus said that the good news would be preached , the zeal that God’s people have for the work has not diminished . 
 We know that by our endurance in doing what is fine , we reflect Jehovah’s qualities of love , mercy , and patience . 
 Like him , we do not desire any to be destroyed but desire that people repent and become reconciled to Jehovah . 
 Aglow with God’s spirit , Jehovah’s Witnesses zealously continue to proclaim the good news to the ends of the earth . 
 As a result , people everywhere are accepting the truth and conforming to Jehovah’s loving direction . 
 Consider a few examples . 
 18 , 19 . 
 What experiences can you relate of some who responded favorably to the good news ? 
 Charles was a farmer in western Kenya . 
 In 1998 he sold over 18,000 pounds [ 8,000 kg ] of tobacco and was awarded a certificate that named him the Best Tobacco Farmer . 
 At that time , he began to study the Bible . 
 Soon he came to realize that a person involved in tobacco production violates Jesus ’ command to love one’s neighbor . 
 Upon concluding that ‘ the best tobacco farmer ’ was really ‘ the best killer , ’ Charles sprayed his tobacco plants with poison . 
 He progressed toward dedication and baptism and is now a regular pioneer and a ministerial servant . 
 There is no doubt that Jehovah is rocking the nations by means of the global witness being given , and the desirable things ​ — people — ​ are coming in . 
 Pedro , who lives in Portugal , entered a seminary when he was 13 years old . 
 His goal was to become a missionary and to teach the Bible . 
 After a short time , however , he left the seminary because the Bible received so little attention in his classes . 
 Six years later found him studying psychology at a university in Lisbon . 
 He lived with his aunt , one of Jehovah’s Witnesses , who encouraged him to study the Bible . 
 At that point , Pedro was not sure that God existed , nor could he decide whether to have a Bible study or not . 
 He spoke to his psychology professor about indecisiveness . 
 The professor said that psychology teaches that people who cannot make decisions tend to be self - destructive . 
 At that , Pedro resolved to have a Bible study . 
 He was recently baptized and is now conducting Bible studies of his own . 
 Why may we rejoice that a witness to the nations is being given on such a vast scale ? 
 We still do not know to what extent a witness will be given to the nations , nor do we know the day and hour when the end will come . 
 We only know that it will be soon . 
 We rejoice that the preaching of the good news on such a vast scale is but one of the many indications that the time is near for God’s Kingdom to replace human governments . 
 With each passing year , millions are being given an opportunity to respond to the good news , and this glorifies our God , Jehovah . 
 May it be our determination to remain faithful and along with our brothers worldwide to keep busy in the work of bearing witness to all the nations . 
 By doing so , we will save both ourselves and those who listen to us . ​ — 1 Timothy 4 : 16 . 
 Do You Remember ? 
 • Why is Matthew 24 : 14 such a remarkable prophecy ? 
 • What efforts did early Christians make in preaching , and with what results ? 
 • How did the Bible Students come to understand the need to bear witness to all the nations ? 
 • In considering the activity of Jehovah’s people in the past service year , what impresses you ? 
 [ Chart on page 27 - 30 ] 
 2005 SERVICE YEAR REPORT OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES WORLDWIDE 
 ( See bound volume ) 
 [ Map / Pictures on page 25 ] 
 Paul traveled thousands of miles on land and sea to preach the good news 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 Jehovah directed Peter to witness to Cornelius and his family 
 An Administration for Fulfilling God’s Purpose 
 “ [ God ] operates all things according to the way his will counsels . ” ​ — EPHESIANS 1 : 11 . 
 Why will all congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses meet on April 12 , 2006 ? 
 ON Wednesday evening , April 12 , 2006 , some 16 million people will gather to observe the Lord’s Evening Meal . 
 In each meeting place , there will be a table on which unleavened bread , representing Christ’s body , and red wine , symbolizing his shed blood , will have been set . 
 Toward the end of a discourse explaining the meaning of the Memorial of Jesus ’ death , these emblems ​ — first the bread , then the wine — ​ will be passed among all present . 
 In relatively few congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses , one or more in attendance will partake of the emblems . 
 In many cases , however , no one present will partake . 
 Why is it that only a few Christians , those who hope to live in heaven , partake , whereas the majority , those who hope to live forever on earth , do not partake ? 
 2 , 3 . ( a ) How did Jehovah proceed to create according to his purpose ? 
 ( b ) For what purpose did Jehovah create the earth and mankind ? 
 Jehovah is a God of purpose . 
 In fulfilling his purpose , he “ operates all things according to the way his will counsels . ” 
 He first created his only - begotten Son . 
 Then , through this Son , Jehovah created a family of spirit sons and eventually the physical universe , including the earth and man upon it . ​ — Job 38 : 4 , 7 ; Psalm 103 : 19 - 21 ; John 1 : 2 , 3 ; Colossians 1 : 15 , 16 . 
 Jehovah did not create the earth as a testing ground to enlarge his family of spirit sons in heaven , as taught by many churches of Christendom . 
 He created it with a definite purpose in mind , for it “ to be inhabited . ” 
 God created the earth for man and man for the earth . 
 The entire globe was to become a paradise , filled with righteous humans , who would cultivate it and take care of it . 
 Never was the prospect of eventually going to heaven held out to the first human couple . ​ — Genesis 1 : 26 - 28 ; 2 : 7 , 8 , 15 . 
 Jehovah’s Purpose Challenged 
 How was Jehovah’s way of exercising sovereignty challenged at the dawn of human history ? 
 A spirit son of God rebelled and set out to thwart Jehovah’s purpose , abusing the divine gift of free will . 
 He disturbed the peace that comes to all who manifest loving submission to Jehovah’s sovereignty . 
 Satan led the first human couple to embark on a course of independence from God . 
 He did not deny Jehovah’s power , but he challenged His way of exercising sovereignty and therefore His right to rule . 
 Thus , the fundamental issue of Jehovah’s sovereignty came into focus here on earth , at the very dawn of mankind’s history . 
 What secondary issue was raised , implicating whom ? 
 Bound up with that primary issue of universal sovereignty is a secondary issue raised by Satan in the days of Job . 
 Satan cast doubt on the motive of Jehovah’s creatures in submitting to Him and serving Him . 
 Satan implied that they were doing so for selfish reasons and that put to the test they would turn against God . 
 While raised in connection with a human servant of Jehovah , this challenge also involved the spirit sons of God , even Jehovah’s only - begotten Son . 
 How did Jehovah prove to be faithful to his purpose and to his name ? 
 Faithful to his purpose and to the meaning of his name , Jehovah caused himself to become a Prophet and a Savior . 
 * He told Satan : “ I shall put enmity between you and the woman and between your seed and her seed . 
 He will bruise you in the head and you will bruise him in the heel . ” 
 By means of the Seed of his “ woman , ” or the heavenly part of his organization , Jehovah would answer Satan’s challenge and provide Adam’s descendants with hope of deliverance and life . ​ — Romans 5 : 21 ; Galatians 4 : 26 , 31 . 
 “ The Sacred Secret of His Will ” 
 What purpose did Jehovah reveal by means of the apostle Paul ? 
 In his letter to Christians in Ephesus , the apostle Paul beautifully explains how Jehovah administers things to fulfill his purpose . 
 Paul wrote : “ He made known to us the sacred secret of his will . 
 It is according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself for an administration at the full limit of the appointed times , namely , to gather all things together again in the Christ , the things in the heavens and the things on the earth . ” 
 Jehovah’s glorious purpose is to bring about a united universe occupied by creatures who lovingly submit to his sovereignty . 
 His name would thus be sanctified , Satan proved a liar , and the divine will accomplished “ as in heaven , also upon earth . ” ​ — Matthew 6 : 10 . 
 What is the meaning of the word translated “ administration ” ? 
 Jehovah’s “ good pleasure , ” or purpose , would be fulfilled by means of “ an administration . ” 
 Paul used a word that literally means “ household management . ” 
 It refers , not to a government , such as the Messianic Kingdom , but to a way of managing things . 
 * The wonderful way in which Jehovah would administer things to accomplish his purpose involved a “ sacred secret ” that would progressively be made known over the centuries . ​ — Ephesians 1 : 10 ; 3 : 9 , footnotes . 
 How did Jehovah progressively reveal the sacred secret of his will ? 
 By means of a series of covenants , Jehovah gradually revealed how his purpose concerning the Seed promised in Eden would be fulfilled . 
 His covenant promise to Abraham revealed that the promised Seed would come to earth in Abraham’s lineage and would be the means whereby “ all nations of the earth ” would bless themselves . 
 That covenant also intimated that others would be associated with the primary part of the seed . 
 The Law covenant made with fleshly Israel disclosed Jehovah’s purpose to have “ a kingdom of priests . ” 
 The covenant with David showed that the Seed would be the Head of a Kingdom to time indefinite . 
 Once the Law covenant led the Jews to the Messiah , Jehovah revealed further aspects of the fulfillment of his purpose . 
 Those humans who were to be associated with the primary part of the seed would form the foretold “ kingdom of priests ” and would be brought into “ a new covenant ” as the new “ Israel , ” a spiritual one . ​ — Jeremiah 31 : 31 - 34 ; Hebrews 8 : 7 - 9 . 
 * 
 10 , 11 . ( a ) How did Jehovah reveal the foretold Seed ? 
 ( b ) Why did God’s only - begotten Son come to earth ? 
 In line with the administration of the divine purpose , the time came for the foretold Seed to appear on earth . 
 Jehovah sent the angel Gabriel to tell Mary that she would give birth to a son who was to be called Jesus . 
 The angel said to her : “ This one will be great and will be called Son of the Most High ; and Jehovah God will give him the throne of David his father , and he will rule as king over the house of Jacob forever , and there will be no end of his kingdom . ” 
 The identity of the promised Seed thus became clear . ​ — Galatians 3 : 16 ; 4 : 4 . 
 Jehovah’s only - begotten Son was to come to earth and be tested to the limit . 
 The perfect answer to Satan’s challenge would be in Jesus ’ hands . 
 Would he remain faithful to his Father ? 
 This involved a sacred secret . 
 The apostle Paul later explained Jesus ’ role : “ The sacred secret of this godly devotion is admittedly great : ‘ He was made manifest in flesh , was declared righteous in spirit , appeared to angels , was preached about among nations , was believed upon in the world , was received up in glory . ’ ” 
 Yes , by his unflinching integrity until his death , Jesus provided the definitive answer to Satan’s challenge . 
 But other details of the sacred secret remained to be uncovered . 
 “ The Sacred Secret of the Kingdom of God ” 
 12 , 13 . ( a ) What is one aspect of “ the sacred secret of the kingdom of God ” ? 
 ( b ) What was involved in Jehovah’s selecting a limited number of humans to go to heaven ? 
 During one of his preaching tours of Galilee , Jesus indicated that the sacred secret was closely related to his Messianic Kingdom government . 
 He told his disciples : “ To you it is granted to understand the sacred secrets of the kingdom of the heavens [ “ kingdom of God , ” Mark 4 : 11 ] . ” 
 One aspect of that secret involved Jehovah’s selecting a “ little flock ” of 144,000 humans to be associated with his Son as part of the seed , to reign with him in heaven . ​ — Luke 12 : 32 ; Revelation 14 : 1 , 4 . 
 Since humans were created to live on earth , “ a new creation ” by Jehovah was required in order for some humans to go to heaven . 
 Speaking as one of those chosen to share this exceptional heavenly hope , the apostle Peter wrote : “ Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ , for according to his great mercy he gave us a new birth to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead , to an incorruptible and undefiled and unfading inheritance . 
 It is reserved in the heavens for you . ” ​ — 1 Peter 1 : 3 , 4 . 
 ( a ) How were non - Jews involved in “ the sacred secret of the kingdom of God ” ? 
 ( b ) Why are we able to understand these “ deep things of God ” ? 
 Another part of the sacred secret with regard to the future Kingdom government was God’s will to include non - Jews among the small number of humans who would be called to reign with Christ in heaven . 
 Paul explained this facet of Jehovah’s “ administration , ” or way of managing the fulfillment of his purpose : “ In other generations this secret was not made known to the sons of men as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by spirit , namely , that people of the nations should be joint heirs and fellow members of the body and partakers with us of the promise in union with Christ Jesus through the good news . ” 
 The comprehension of this part of the sacred secret was revealed to the “ holy apostles . ” 
 Similarly today , if it were not for the help of the holy spirit , we would not understand these “ deep things of God . ” ​ — 1 Corinthians 2 : 10 ; 4 : 1 ; Colossians 1 : 26 , 27 . 
 15 , 16 . 
 Why did Jehovah select Christ’s associate rulers from among mankind ? 
 “ The hundred and forty - four thousand ” seen standing with “ the Lamb ” on heavenly Mount Zion are said to have been “ bought from the earth , ” “ bought from among mankind as firstfruits to God and to the Lamb , ” Christ Jesus . 
 Jehovah chose the first of his heavenly sons to become the primary part of the seed promised in Eden , but why did he select Christ’s associates from among mankind ? 
 The apostle Paul explains that this limited number was “ called according to his [ Jehovah’s ] purpose , ” “ according to the good pleasure of his will . ” ​ — Romans 8 : 17 , 28 - 30 ; Ephesians 1 : 5 , 11 ; 2 Timothy 1 : 9 . 
 Jehovah’s purpose is to sanctify his great and holy name and vindicate his universal sovereignty . 
 By his incomparably wise “ administration , ” or way of managing things , Jehovah sent his firstborn Son to earth , where he was tested to the limit . 
 Furthermore , Jehovah determined that the Messianic Kingdom government of his Son would include humans who had also upheld His sovereignty until death . ​ — Ephesians 1 : 8 - 12 ; Revelation 2 : 10 , 11 . 
 Why can we be glad that Christ and his associate rulers once lived as humans ? 
 Jehovah showed his great love for Adam’s descendants by having his Son come to the earth and by selecting from among mankind those who would be the Son’s joint heirs in the Kingdom government . 
 How could that benefit others who have proved faithful to Jehovah , from Abel onward ? 
 Born slaves to sin and death , imperfect humans would need to be spiritually and physically healed and brought to perfection , in line with Jehovah’s original purpose for mankind . 
 How comforting it is for all of those who look forward to everlasting life on earth to know that their King will show them love and kind understanding just as he did to his disciples during his earthly ministry ! 
 And how reassuring it is for them to realize that Christ’s associate king - priests in heaven were once men and women of faith who themselves contended with personal weaknesses and experienced life’s challenges as we do ! ​ — Romans 7 : 21 - 25 . 
 Jehovah’s Unfailing Purpose 
 18 , 19 . 
 Why are Paul’s words at Ephesians 1 : 8 - 11 clearer to us , and what will be considered in the following article ? 
 We are now better able to understand the import of Paul’s words to anointed Christians , as found at Ephesians 1 : 8 - 11 . 
 He said that Jehovah had made known to them “ the sacred secret of his will , ” that they were “ assigned as heirs ” with Christ , and that they were “ foreordained according to the purpose of him who operates all things according to the way his will counsels . ” 
 We perceive that this fits into Jehovah’s marvelous “ administration ” of things for the fulfilling of his purpose . 
 This also helps us to understand why only a few Christians attending the Lord’s Evening Meal partake of the emblems . 
 In the following article , we will see what the Memorial of Christ’s death means to those Christians whose hope is heavenly . 
 We will also learn why millions whose hope is to live forever on earth should be intensely interested in what the Memorial symbolizes . 
 [ Footnotes ] 
 The divine name literally means “ He Causes to Become . ” 
 Jehovah can become whatever is necessary to fulfill his purpose . ​ — Exodus 3 : 14 , footnote . 
 Paul’s words show that the “ administration ” was functioning in his day , whereas the Scriptures indicate that the Messianic Kingdom was not established until 1914 . 
 For a detailed discussion of these covenants involved in the outworking of God’s purpose , see The Watchtower of February 1 , 1989 , pages 10 - 15 . 
 By Way of Review 
 • Why did Jehovah create the earth and put man upon it ? 
 • Why was it necessary for Jehovah’s only - begotten Son to be tested on earth ? 
 • Why did Jehovah select Christ’s associate rulers from among mankind ? 
 Walking in the Path of Increasing Light 
 “ The path of the righteous ones is like the bright light that is getting lighter and lighter until the day is firmly established . ” ​ — PROVERBS 4 : 18 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What have God’s people experienced as a result of increased spiritual light from Jehovah ? 
 WHO can better describe the effect that the rising sun has on the darkness of the night than the very Source of light , Jehovah God ? 
 ‘ When the morning light takes hold on the ends of the earth , ’ God says , ‘ the earth transforms itself like clay under a seal , and things take their station as in clothing . ’ 
 With increasing light from the sun , earth’s features take shape and become clearer , just as soft clay undergoes a transformation upon receiving an imprint from an emblem on a seal . 
 Jehovah is also the Source of spiritual light . 
 While the world remains in dense darkness , the true God continues to shed light upon his people . 
 With what result ? 
 The Bible answers : “ The path of the righteous ones is like the bright light that is getting lighter and lighter until the day is firmly established . ” 
 Increasing light from Jehovah continues to illuminate the path of his people . 
 It refines them organizationally , doctrinally , and morally . 
 Enlightenment Leads to Organizational Refinements 
 What is promised at Isaiah 60 : 17 ? 
 Through the prophet Isaiah , Jehovah foretold : “ Instead of the copper I shall bring in gold , and instead of the iron I shall bring in silver , and instead of the wood , copper , and instead of the stones , iron . ” 
 Just as replacing an inferior material with a superior one denotes improvement , Jehovah’s Witnesses have experienced improvements in their organizational arrangements all through “ the conclusion of the system of things , ” or “ the last days . ” ​ — Matthew 24 : 3 ; 2 Timothy 3 : 1 . 
 What arrangement went into effect in 1919 , and how was it beneficial ? 
 In the early part of the last days , the congregations of Bible Students , as Jehovah’s Witnesses were then known , democratically elected their elders and deacons . 
 Some elders , however , did not have the genuine spirit of evangelizing . 
 Some not only were reluctant to participate in the preaching work themselves but also discouraged others from sharing in it . 
 So in 1919 a new office was instituted in each congregation ​ — that of a service director . 
 The service director was not elected by the congregation but was appointed theocratically to his position by the branch office of God’s people . 
 The responsibilities of the appointed director included organizing the preaching work , assigning territories , and encouraging participation in the field ministry . 
 During the years that followed , the Kingdom - preaching work received a tremendous stimulus . 
 What refinement became a reality in the 1920 ’ s ? 
 All in the congregation were further invigorated by the exhortation “ Advertise , advertise , advertise , the King and his kingdom , ” given in 1922 at the Bible Students ’ convention at Cedar Point , Ohio , U.S.A . 
 By 1927 field service was organized to the point that Sunday was designated as the most suitable day for participating in the house - to - house preaching work . 
 Why that day ? 
 Because Sunday was the day when most people were off work . 
 Jehovah’s Witnesses today manifest the same spirit by endeavoring to call on people at times when they are most likely to be at home , such as on weekends and in the evenings . 
 In 1931 , what resolution was adopted , and how did that affect the Kingdom - proclamation work ? 
 A great impetus to the Kingdom - proclamation work came on Sunday afternoon , July 26 , 1931 , when a resolution was adopted , first at a convention in Columbus , Ohio , U.S.A . , and thereafter around the world . 
 In part , the resolution stated : “ We are servants of Jehovah God commissioned to do a work in his name , and , in obedience to his commandment , to deliver the testimony of Jesus Christ , and to make known to the people that Jehovah is the true and Almighty God ; therefore we joyfully embrace and take the name which the mouth of the Lord God has named , and we desire to be known as and called by the name , to wit , Jehovah’s witnesses . ” 
 How clearly that new name defined the primary activity of all of those bearing that name ! 
 Yes , Jehovah had work for all his servants to share in . 
 The overall response was enthusiastic indeed ! 
 What change was introduced in 1932 , and why ? 
 Many elders humbly devoted themselves to the preaching work . 
 In some places , though , elected elders put up considerable resistance to the idea that everyone in the congregation should participate in the public ministry . 
 However , further improvements were in sight . 
 In 1932 the congregations received instruction through The Watchtower to discontinue the electing of elders and deacons . 
 Instead , they were to elect a service committee composed of spiritual men who participated in the public preaching work . 
 Oversight was thus entrusted to those who actively shared in the ministry , and the work moved ahead . 
 Increased Light Means Further Improvements 
 What refinement came about in 1938 ? 
 The light was “ getting lighter and lighter . ” 
 In 1938 the use of elections was eliminated altogether . 
 All servants in the congregation were to be appointed theocratically under the oversight of “ the faithful and discreet slave . ” 
 The change was readily accepted by practically all the congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses , and the work of witnessing continued to bear fruit . 
 In 1972 , what arrangement was instituted , and why was that an improvement ? 
 Beginning October 1 , 1972 , another adjustment in congregational oversight became effective . 
 The arrangement of oversight by a body of elders was instituted in the congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide , replacing oversight by just one congregation servant , or overseer . 
 This new arrangement has provided tremendous encouragement for mature men to qualify to take the lead in the congregation . 
 As a result , a greater number of brothers have gained experience in caring for congregational responsibilities . 
 How valuable they have proved to be in shepherding the many new ones who have accepted Bible truth ! 
 What arrangement was implemented in 1976 ? 
 The members of the Governing Body were organized into six committees , and starting on January 1 , 1976 , all the activities of the organization and of the congregations around the earth came under the supervision of these committees . 
 What a blessing it has proved to be to have all aspects of the Kingdom work directed by a “ multitude of counselors ” ! ​ — Proverbs 15 : 22 ; 24 : 6 . 
 What refinement was introduced in 1992 , and why ? 
 The year 1992 saw still another refinement , one that is comparable to what happened after the Israelites and others returned from exile in Babylon . 
 Back at that time , there were not a sufficient number of Levites to care for temple service . 
 So non - Israelite Nethinim were given more to do in helping the Levites . 
 Accordingly , to assist the faithful and discreet slave class in caring for its increasing earthly interests , in 1992 some of the “ other sheep ” received added service responsibilities . 
 They were appointed as helpers to the Governing Body committees . ​ — John 10 : 16 . 
 How has Jehovah appointed peace as our overseers ? 
 What has resulted from all of this ? 
 “ I will appoint peace as your overseers and righteousness as your task assigners , ” says Jehovah . 
 There is “ peace ” among Jehovah’s servants today , and love of “ righteousness ” has become their ‘ task assigner ’ ​ — the force that impels them to serve God . 
 They are well - organized to carry out the Kingdom - preaching and disciple - making work . ​ — Matthew 24 : 14 ; 28 : 19 , 20 . 
 Jehovah Illuminates the Path Doctrinally 
 In the 1920 ’ s , how did Jehovah illuminate the path of his people doctrinally ? 
 Jehovah is also progressively illuminating the path of his people doctrinally . 
 Revelation 12 : 1 - 9 provides an example . 
 The account refers to three symbolic characters ​ — “ a woman ” who is pregnant and gives birth , a “ dragon , ” and “ a son , a male . ” 
 Do you know whom each figure represents ? 
 They were identified in an article entitled “ Birth of the Nation , ” which appeared in the March 1 , 1925 , issue of The Watch Tower . 
 That article gave God’s people a better understanding of the prophecies about the birth of the Kingdom , insight that made it clear that there exist two distinct organizations ​ — Jehovah’s and Satan’s . 
 Then in 1927 / 28 , God’s people recognized that Christmas and birthday celebrations are unscriptural , and they discontinued observing such . 
 What doctrinal truths were clarified in the 1930 ’ s ? 
 The 1930 ’ s saw further light shed on three doctrinal truths . 
 For years , the Bible Students had known that the great multitude , or the “ great crowd , ” spoken of at Revelation 7 : 9 - 17 was different from the 144,000 , who would rule with Christ as kings and priests . 
 However , the identity of the great multitude remained unclear . 
 Just as increasing morning light causes otherwise obscure objects to take on shape and color , in 1935 the great multitude was identified as those who survive “ the great tribulation , ” with the prospect of living forever on earth . 
 Later in the same year came a clarification that affected school - age children of Jehovah’s Witnesses in a number of countries . 
 While patriotic fervor was running high the world over , the Witnesses recognized that saluting the flag is much more than a mere formalism . 
 In the following year , another doctrinal truth , that Christ died on a stake , not a cross , was explained . ​ — Acts 10 : 39 . 
 When and how was the sanctity of blood brought to the fore ? 
 In the wake of World War II , during which it had become standard practice to treat wounded soldiers with blood transfusions , there was increased light on the sanctity of blood . 
 The July 1 , 1945 , issue of The Watchtower encouraged “ all worshipers of Jehovah who seek eternal life in his new world of righteousness to respect the sanctity of blood and to conform themselves to God’s righteous rulings concerning this vital matter . ” 
 When was the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures released , and what are two outstanding features of it ? 
 In 1946 a need was seen for a fresh Bible translation that took advantage of the latest scholarship and was not tainted by dogmas based on traditions of Christendom . 
 Work on such a translation began in December 1947 . 
 In 1950 the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures was released in English . 
 The Hebrew Scriptures in English came in five volumes , released progressively beginning in 1953 . 
 The final volume was released in 1960 , a little over 12 years after the translation project began . 
 The complete New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures in one volume was released in 1961 . 
 Now available in many languages , this translation has some outstanding features . 
 It restores the divine name , Jehovah . 
 Moreover , its literal rendering of the original writings has provided the basis for continuous progress in the understanding of divine truth . 
 What increased light was shed in 1962 ? 
 Clarification of “ the superior authorities ” of Romans 13 : 1 and the extent of a Christian’s subjection to them came in 1962 . 
 An in - depth study of the 13th chapter of Romans and Scriptural texts such as Titus 3 : 1 , 2 and 1 Peter 2 : 13 , 17 made it clear that the expression “ superior authorities ” refers , not to Jehovah God and Jesus Christ , but to human governmental authorities . 
 What are some truths clarified in the 1980 ’ s ? 
 In the years that followed , the path of the righteous ones continued to get brighter and brighter . 
 In 1985 light was shed upon what it means to be declared righteous “ for life ” and righteous as a friend of God . 
 The meaning of the Christian Jubilee was thoroughly explained in 1987 . 
 How has Jehovah provided more spiritual light for his people in recent years ? 
 In 1995 the separating of “ the sheep ” from “ the goats ” was more clearly understood . 
 The year 1998 saw the detailed explanation of Ezekiel’s temple vision , which is already in the course of fulfillment . 
 In 1999 came clarification of when and how ‘ the disgusting thing stands in a holy place . ’ 
 And in 2002 further discernment was gained regarding what it means to worship God “ with spirit and truth . ” ​ — John 4 : 24 . 
 In what other area have God’s people experienced refinements ? 
 In addition to the organizational and doctrinal refinements , there have been refinements with regard to Christian conduct . 
 For example , in 1973 the use of tobacco was seen as a “ defilement of flesh ” and was to be viewed as serious wrongdoing . 
 A decade later , the July 15 , 1983 , issue of The Watchtower clarified our position on the use of firearms . 
 These are just some examples of the increasing light in our time . 
 Go On Walking in the Path of Increasing Light 
 Having what attitude will help us to go on walking in the path of increasing light ? 
 “ Accepting a change when it comes and adapting to it can be difficult , ” admits one longtime elder . 
 What has helped him accept the many refinements he has witnessed in the 48 years that he has been a Kingdom proclaimer ? 
 He answers : “ Having the right attitude is the key . 
 Refusing to accept a refinement is to be left behind as the organization moves ahead . 
 If I find myself in a situation where changes seem hard to accept , I reflect on Peter’s words to Jesus : ‘ Lord , whom shall we go away to ? 
 You have sayings of everlasting life . ’ 
 Then I ask myself , ‘ Where shall I go away to ​ — out there into the darkness of the world ? ’ 
 This helps me to hold firmly to God’s organization . ” ​ — John 6 : 68 . 
 How do we benefit from walking in the light ? 
 The world around us is certainly in dense darkness . 
 As Jehovah continues to shed light on his people , the gap between them and those of the world keeps on widening . 
 What does this light do for us ? 
 Well , just as shining a spotlight on a pothole on a dark roadway does not remove the hole , light from God’s Word does not remove pitfalls . 
 Yet , divine light surely helps us to avoid them so that we can continue walking in the path of increasing light . 
 Let us , then , continue to pay attention to Jehovah’s prophetic word , “ as to a lamp shining in a dark place . ” ​ — 2 Peter 1 : 19 . 
 Do You Recall ? 
 • What organizational improvements has Jehovah brought to his people ? 
 • Increased light has brought about what doctrinal refinements ? 
 • What adjustments have you personally witnessed , and what has helped you to accept them ? 
 • Why do you want to keep on walking in the path of increasing light ? 
 [ Pictures on page 27 ] 
 The 1922 Cedar Point , Ohio , convention invigorated the Bible Students to do God’s work 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 The “ New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures ” released in 1950 , by N . 
 H . 
 Knorr 
 [ Picture Credit Line on page 26 ] 
 © 2003 BiblePlaces.com 
 Wholesome Recreation That Refreshes 
 “ Whether you are eating or drinking or doing anything else , do all things for God’s glory . ” ​ — 1 CORINTHIANS 10 : 31 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 Why may pleasurable activities be viewed as a “ gift of God , ” yet what frank warning does the Bible give ? 
 IT IS natural to want to engage in activities that bring us pleasure . 
 Our happy God , Jehovah , wants us to enjoy life , and he furnishes abundant provisions to make that possible . 
 Wise King Solomon wrote : “ I have come to know that there is nothing better . . . than to rejoice . . . and also that every man should eat and indeed drink and see good for all his hard work . 
 It is the gift of God . ” ​ — Ecclesiastes 3 : 12 , 13 . 
 Such rejoicing as one pauses to reflect on good work accomplished is indeed refreshing , especially in pleasant association with family or friends . 
 It may properly be viewed as a “ gift of God . ” 
 Of course , the Creator’s providing so abundantly does not give us license to engage in unrestrained merriment . 
 The Bible condemns drunkenness , gluttony , and immorality , warning that those who practice such things “ will not inherit God’s kingdom . ” — 1 Corinthians 6 : 9 , 10 ; Proverbs 23 : 20 , 21 ; 1 Peter 4 : 1 - 4 . 
 What will help us to stay spiritually awake and to keep in mind Jehovah’s great day ? 
 In these critical last days , as never before , Christians are faced with the challenge of living circumspectly in a corrupt world without adopting its practices . 
 As foretold , people of today’s generation have become “ lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God ” to the extent that they take “ no note ” of the evidence that the “ great tribulation ” is just ahead . 
 Jesus warned his followers : “ Pay attention to yourselves that your hearts never become weighed down with overeating and heavy drinking and anxieties of life , and suddenly that day be instantly upon you as a snare . ” 
 As servants of God , we are determined to heed Jesus ’ warning . 
 Unlike those in the ungodly world around us , we strive to stay spiritually awake and to keep in mind Jehovah’s great day . ​ — Zephaniah 3 : 8 ; Luke 21 : 36 . 
 ( a ) Why is it difficult to find acceptable recreation ? 
 ( b ) What counsel found at Ephesians 5 : 15 , 16 do we want to apply ? 
 Keeping free of the corrupt practices of the world is not easy , since the Devil has made them so desirable and accessible . 
 It is especially difficult when we seek entertainment or recreation . 
 Most of what the world offers is designed to appeal to “ fleshly desires . ” 
 Harmful entertainment is available in public areas , but it can also penetrate the privacy of the home by means of the printed page , TV , the Internet , and videos . 
 Therefore , God’s Word wisely counsels Christians : “ Keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons , buying out the opportune time for yourselves , because the days are wicked . ” 
 Only if we follow this counsel closely can we make sure that harmful entertainment will not entice us , absorb us , yes , even destroy our relationship with Jehovah , ending in our destruction ! ​ — James 1 : 14 , 15 . 
 From what do we receive our greatest refreshment ? 
 Since Christians live busy lives , they understandably feel the need on occasion to enjoy some recreational activities . 
 In fact , Ecclesiastes 3 : 4 says that there is “ a time to laugh ” and “ a time to skip about . ” 
 So the Bible does not treat recreation as a waste of time . 
 But recreation should refresh us , not endanger our spirituality or encroach on spiritual activities . 
 Mature Christians know from experience that greater happiness comes from giving . 
 They put the doing of Jehovah’s will foremost in their lives and experience genuine ‘ refreshment for their souls ’ in accepting Jesus ’ kindly yoke . ​ — Matthew 11 : 29 , 30 ; Acts 20 : 35 . 
 Choosing Acceptable Recreation 
 6 , 7 . 
 What can help you decide what is acceptable or unacceptable entertainment ? 
 How can we be sure that a certain form of recreation is acceptable for a Christian ? 
 Parents provide guidance for their children , and elders help as needed . 
 Really , though , it should not be necessary for others to tell us that a particular book , movie , game , dance , or song is unacceptable . 
 Paul said that “ mature people . . . through use have their perceptive powers trained to distinguish both right and wrong . ” 
 The Bible sets forth guiding principles . 
 Your conscience , trained by God’s Word , will help you if you listen to it . ​ — 1 Timothy 1 : 19 . 
 Jesus said that “ by its fruit the tree is known . ” 
 If a recreational pursuit produces the rotten fruitage of an attraction to violence , immorality , or spiritism , it should be rejected . 
 It is also unacceptable if it endangers one’s life or health , if it causes economic hardship or discouragement , or if it causes others to stumble . 
 The apostle Paul warned us that if we wound the conscience of our brother , we are sinning . 
 Paul wrote : “ When you people thus sin against your brothers and wound their conscience that is weak , you are sinning against Christ . 
 Therefore , if food makes my brother stumble , I will never again eat flesh at all , that I may not make my brother stumble . ” ​ — 1 Corinthians 8 : 12 , 13 . 
 What dangers exist in using electronic games and videos ? 
 Stores are flooded with electronic games and videos . 
 Some may provide harmless fun and relaxation , but such entertainment increasingly features what the Bible condemns . 
 Surely it is not just innocent fun when a game requires that its players maim and kill or act in a grossly immoral way ! 
 Jehovah hates those “ loving violence . ” 
 And if playing a game promotes in you greed or aggression , drains you emotionally , or squanders valuable time , then recognize the spiritual harm it causes and quickly make adjustments . ​ — Matthew 18 : 8 , 9 . 
 Fulfilling Recreational Needs in Wholesome Ways 
 9 , 10 . 
 What can discerning ones do to fulfill their recreational needs ? 
 At times , Christians ask : “ What is acceptable recreation ? 
 So much of what the world offers runs counter to Bible standards . ” 
 Be assured that satisfying recreation can be found , but it takes effort . 
 It requires forethought and planning , especially on the part of parents . 
 Many find rewarding relaxation within the family circle and in the congregation . 
 Enjoying a leisurely meal while discussing the events of the day or a Bible topic is pleasant and upbuilding . 
 Picnics , appropriate games , camping trips , or hikes can be arranged . 
 Such wholesome recreation can be fun and rewarding . 
 An elder and his wife who have raised three children report : “ From an early age , our children were involved in choosing where we would go on vacation . 
 At times , we allowed each child to invite a good friend , which made the vacation more enjoyable . 
 Certain milestones in our children’s lives were recognized . 
 Periodically , we invited family and friends in the congregation to our home . 
 We had cookouts and played games . 
 We took drives and walks in the mountains , using such occasions to learn about Jehovah’s creation . ” 
 11 , 12 . ( a ) What can you do to include others in your plans for occasional recreation ? 
 ( b ) What kind of gatherings have proved unforgettable for many ? 
 Can you widen out individually or as a family to include others when making plans for occasional recreation ? 
 Some , such as a widow , a single person , or a single - parent family , may need encouragement . 
 You might also include a few who are newly associated , being careful , of course , not to expose others to any harmful influence . 
 If infirm ones find it difficult to go out , perhaps arrangements can be made to bring a meal to share with them in their home . ​ — Hebrews 13 : 1 , 2 . 
 Gatherings at which guests enjoy a simple meal , hear how others became Christians , and learn what has helped them to stay faithful to God have proved unforgettable for many . 
 Bible topics can be brought up for discussion , with all present , including children , being invited to share . 
 Such discussions can be profitable interchanges of encouragement without anyone having to feel uncomfortable or inadequate . 
 How did Jesus and Paul set the example in showing and accepting hospitality ? 
 Jesus set the proper example in showing and accepting hospitality . 
 He always used such occasions to impart spiritual blessings . 
 His early disciples imitated his example . 
 The apostle Paul wrote : “ I am longing to see you , that I may impart some spiritual gift to you in order for you to be made firm ; or , rather , that there may be an interchange of encouragement among you , by each one through the other’s faith , both yours and mine . ” 
 Similarly , our gatherings should provide the atmosphere for an interchange of encouragement . ​ — Romans 12 : 13 ; 15 : 1 , 2 . 
 Some Reminders and Cautions 
 Why are large social events not advisable ? 
 Having large social events is not advisable , since supervision at such is often difficult . 
 At a time that does not interfere with spiritual activities , a few families may decide to enjoy a picnic together or play a game that is not overly competitive . 
 When some of the elders , ministerial servants , or other mature ones are present at a social gathering , they provide an influence for good and the occasion can be even more refreshing . 
 Why should hosting an event include proper supervision ? 
 At social gatherings , those making the arrangements should not overlook the need for proper supervision . 
 While you enjoy showing hospitality , would you not feel very bad if you learned that because of some negligence on your part , a guest was stumbled by what occurred in your home ? 
 Consider the principle discussed at Deuteronomy 22 : 8 . 
 The Israelite who constructed a new home was required to build a parapet around the flat roof , which was often used to entertain guests . 
 Why ? 
 “ That you may not place bloodguilt upon your house because someone falling might fall from it . ” 
 In a similar way , what you do ​ — without imposing unreasonable restrictions — ​ to protect your guests at a social gathering should be with their physical and spiritual interests at heart . 
 What discretion should be exercised if alcohol is served at a social gathering ? 
 If alcohol is served at a social gathering , this should be done with great discretion . 
 Many Christian hosts decide to serve alcoholic drinks only if they can personally oversee what their guests are served or consume . 
 Nothing should be permitted that might stumble others or tempt anyone to overindulge . 
 For various reasons , some guests may decide to abstain from alcohol . 
 Many places have a minimum legal drinking age , and Christians will be obedient to Caesar’s laws even if these regulations seem overly restrictive . ​ — Romans 13 : 5 . 
 ( a ) If music is played at a social event , why is it important that the host be very selective ? 
 ( b ) If there is dancing at a gathering , how should modesty be reflected ? 
 The host should make sure that any music , dancing , or other entertainment is consistent with Christian principles . 
 Musical tastes differ , and a wide variety of music is available . 
 However , much of today’s music promotes a spirit of rebellion , immorality , and violence . 
 There is a need for being selective . 
 Decent music need not necessarily be sedate , but neither should it be sensuous or vulgar , with emphasis on noise and a loud beat . 
 Be careful that you do not leave the choice of music to someone who has yet to appreciate the need for keeping the volume at a moderate level . 
 A dance that involves immodest behavior , emphasizing erotic movements of the hips and breasts , would obviously not be proper for a Christian . ​ — 1 Timothy 2 : 8 - 10 . 
 How can parents safeguard their children by supervising their social activity ? 
 Christian parents should find out what is planned for any social gatherings that their children are invited to attend , and it would be wise to go along with them in most instances . 
 Sadly , some parents have allowed their children to attend unsupervised parties where several in attendance have been enticed into immorality or other unseemly conduct . 
 Even if youths are in their late teens and have shown that they can act responsibly , there is still a need to help them to “ flee from the desires incidental to youth . ” ​ — 2 Timothy 2 : 22 . 
 What reality can help us focus on what we should be “ seeking first ” ? 
 Occasional recreation and entertainment that is wholesome and refreshing can make life more enjoyable . 
 Jehovah does not deny us this pleasure , but realistically we know that such activities do not in themselves help us to store up any spiritual treasures in heaven . 
 Jesus helped his disciples to understand that “ seeking first the kingdom and [ God’s ] righteousness ” is the important thing in life , not what we may eat or drink or wear , “ things the nations are eagerly pursuing . ” ​ — Matthew 6 : 31 - 34 . 
 Faithful servants of Jehovah can anticipate what good things from the Grand Provider ? 
 Yes , whether we are “ eating or drinking or doing anything else , ” we can do “ all things for God’s glory , ” thanking the Grand Provider for good things enjoyed in moderation . 
 In his Paradise earth just ahead , there will be endless occasions to enjoy to the full Jehovah’s generosity , along with the wholesome fellowship of all who meet his righteous requirements . ​ — Psalm 145 : 16 ; Isaiah 25 : 6 ; 2 Corinthians 7 : 1 . 
 Do You Remember ? 
 • Why is it difficult for Christians today to find recreation that is wholesome ? 
 • What are some forms of recreation that have proved to be satisfying for Christian families ? 
 • When enjoying wholesome recreation , what reminders and cautions should one keep in mind ? 
 [ Picture on page 18 ] 
 Choose recreation that produces good fruitage 
 [ Pictures on page 19 ] 
 What forms of recreation do Christians reject ? 
 “ Keep Your Senses Completely ” 
 “ Anyone inexperienced puts faith in every word , but the shrewd one considers his steps . ” ​ — PROVERBS 14 : 15 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) What does Lot’s experience in Sodom teach us ? 
 ( b ) What does the expression “ keep your senses ” mean ? 
 WHEN Abraham offered Lot the first choice of the land , Lot’s eyes were drawn to a well - watered region that was “ like the garden of Jehovah . ” 
 It must have seemed to be the perfect place to settle his family , since “ Lot chose for himself the whole District of the Jordan ” and set up camp near Sodom . 
 However , outward appearances were deceptive , for nearby lived “ the men of Sodom [ who ] were bad and were gross sinners against Jehovah . ” 
 As events unfolded , Lot and his family suffered terrible losses . 
 Eventually , he and his daughters were reduced to living in a cave . 
 What had looked so good to him at the outset turned out to be just the opposite . 
 The account of what befell Lot provides a lesson for servants of God today . 
 When we face decisions , we must be alert to possible dangers and guard against being deceived by first impressions . 
 It is fitting , then , that God’s Word urges us : “ Keep your senses completely . ” 
 The Greek word here rendered “ keep your senses ” literally means “ be sober . ” 
 According to Bible scholar R.C.H . 
 Lenski , that soberness is “ a calm , steady state of mind which weighs and estimates things aright and thus enables us to make the right decision . ” 
 Let us consider some situations that call for us to be sober - minded . 
 Weighing a Business Opportunity 
 Why is there a need for caution if we are approached with a business opportunity ? 
 Suppose you are offered a business opportunity by a respected person , perhaps a fellow worshipper of Jehovah . 
 He is enthusiastic about the prospects for success and encourages you to act quickly so as not to miss out . 
 You may begin to envision a better life for you and your family , perhaps even reasoning that this would enable you to devote more time to spiritual pursuits . 
 However , Proverbs 14 : 15 cautions : “ Anyone inexperienced puts faith in every word , but the shrewd one considers his steps . ” 
 In the excitement that often accompanies starting a new business , risks may be underestimated , dangers overlooked , and the uncertainties of being in business not fully considered . 
 In such a situation , how necessary it would be to keep your senses completely ! 
 How can we ‘ consider our steps ’ when evaluating a business proposal ? 
 A prudent person carefully examines a business proposal before making a decision . 
 Such an examination often reveals hidden dangers . 
 Consider the following scenario : A person is seeking to borrow money in connection with his business plans and offers you a large profit if you lend him funds . 
 The offer may sound tempting , but what are the risks ? 
 Does the borrower agree to repay the money regardless of how the business fares , or does repayment depend on the success of the business ? 
 In other words , could you lose your money if the business fails ? 
 You might also ask : “ Why is money being sought from individuals ? 
 Do banks view the venture as too risky ? ” 
 Taking time to consider the risks will help you to evaluate the proposal realistically . ​ — Proverbs 13 : 16 ; 22 : 3 . 
 ( a ) What wise step did Jeremiah take when he bought a field ? 
 ( b ) Why is it beneficial to document all business arrangements in a formal written agreement ? 
 When the prophet Jeremiah bought a field from his cousin , who was a fellow worshipper of Jehovah , he made a written record of the transaction before witnesses . 
 A wise person today will make sure that all business arrangements he enters , including those with relatives and fellow believers , are documented in a formal written agreement . 
 * Having a clear , well - prepared written agreement helps to prevent misunderstandings and preserve unity . 
 On the other hand , failure to have a written agreement is often a contributing factor when business problems arise between servants of Jehovah . 
 Sadly , such problems can result in heartache , bitterness , and even loss of spirituality . 
 Why do we need to guard against greed ? 
 We must also guard against greed . 
 The promise of huge profits can blind one to the risks of an unsound business venture . 
 Even some who have enjoyed fine privileges in Jehovah’s service have become entangled in this snare . 
 God’s Word cautions us : “ Let your manner of life be free of the love of money , while you are content with the present things . ” 
 When contemplating a business opportunity , a Christian should consider , ‘ Is it really necessary to get involved ? ’ 
 Leading a simple life centered on our worship of Jehovah will protect us from “ all sorts of injurious things . ” ​ — 1 Timothy 6 : 6 - 10 . 
 Challenges Facing Single Christians 
 ( a ) What challenges do many single Christians face ? 
 ( b ) How does our choice of a marriage mate involve loyalty to God ? 
 Many servants of Jehovah long to be married but have not yet found a suitable mate . 
 In some lands , there is strong social pressure to marry . 
 Yet , opportunities to meet a potential mate among fellow believers may be few . 
 Christians recognize , though , that heeding the Biblical injunction to marry “ only in the Lord ” is a matter of loyalty to Jehovah . 
 To stand firm against the pressures and temptations that they face , single Christians must keep their senses completely . 
 What pressure did a Shulammite girl come under , and how might Christian women today face a similar challenge ? 
 In the Song of Solomon , a simple country girl called the Shulammite attracts the attention of the king . 
 He woos her with an impressive display of wealth , prestige , and charm , although she is already in love with a young man . 
 If you are a Christian woman , you too may find yourself the object of someone’s unwanted attention . 
 A person at your place of employment , perhaps someone in a position of authority , may begin to pay you compliments , do you favors , and seek opportunities to be with you . 
 Be wary of such flattering attention . 
 Although such a person’s intentions are not always romantic or immoral , oftentimes they are . 
 Like the Shulammite maiden , be “ a wall . ” 
 Firmly reject unwanted advances . 
 Make it known to your workmates from the very start that you are one of Jehovah’s Witnesses , and take every opportunity to witness to them . 
 That will serve as a protection for you . 
 What are some dangers of entering into a relationship with a stranger on the Internet ? 
 ( See also the box on page 25 . ) 
 Internet Web sites designed to help single individuals find a marriage partner are becoming popular . 
 Some view these as a way to get to know people whom they would not otherwise meet . 
 However , blindly entering into a relationship with a stranger involves real dangers . 
 On the Internet , it can be difficult to distinguish fact from fiction . 
 Not everyone who claims to be a servant of Jehovah really is . 
 Moreover , with online dating , a strong attachment can develop quickly , and that can distort one’s judgment . 
 Whether via the Internet or by some other means , it is unwise to cultivate a close relationship with a person whom one knows very little about . ​ — 1 Corinthians 15 : 33 . 
 How can single Christians be encouraged by fellow believers ? 
 Jehovah “ is very tender in affection ” for his servants . 
 He knows that the challenges facing Christians who are involuntarily single are at times disheartening , and he treasures their loyalty . 
 How can others encourage them ? 
 We should regularly commend them for their obedience and self - sacrificing spirit . 
 We can also include them in arrangements for upbuilding association . 
 Have you done that recently ? 
 Moreover , we can pray for them , asking Jehovah to help them keep their spiritual balance and find joy in serving him . 
 By our sincere interest , may we show that we appreciate these loyal ones as Jehovah does . ​ — Psalm 37 : 28 . 
 Dealing With Health Problems 
 What challenges do serious health problems present ? 
 How distressing it is when we or a loved one faces serious health problems ! 
 While we seek to find effective treatment , it is vital that we adhere to Scriptural principles . 
 For example , Christians are careful to obey the Bible’s command to abstain from blood , and they avoid any diagnostic or therapeutic procedure that involves spiritism . 
 For those without medical training , however , evaluating treatment options can be perplexing and intimidating . 
 What can help us to keep our senses completely ? 
 How can a Christian keep his balance when considering treatment options ? 
 “ The shrewd one considers his steps ” by doing research in the Bible and Christian publications . 
 In parts of the earth where doctors and hospitals are few , traditional medicine , which makes use of herbal remedies , may be the only treatment available . 
 If we are considering such treatment , we can find helpful information in the April 15 , 1987 , issue of The Watchtower , pages 26 - 9 . 
 It alerts us to potential dangers . 
 For example , we may need to find out the following : Is the traditional healer known to practice spiritism ? 
 Is the treatment based on the belief that sickness and death are caused either by offended gods ( or ancestral spirits ) or by enemies who employ witchcraft ? 
 Are sacrifices , incantations , or other spiritistic rituals employed in the preparation or use of the medicine ? 
 Such research will help us to heed the inspired counsel : “ Make sure of all things ; hold fast to what is fine . ” 
 * It will help us to keep our balance . 
 13 , 14 . ( a ) How can we demonstrate reasonableness in caring for our physical health ? 
 ( b ) Why is reasonableness needed when we discuss health and medical matters with others ? 
 Reasonableness is needed in all areas of life , including the care of our physical health . 
 Giving balanced attention to our health shows appreciation for the precious gift of life . 
 When we face health problems , these rightly demand our attention . 
 However , perfect health will not be attainable until God’s time arrives for “ the curing of the nations . ” 
 We must guard against becoming so preoccupied with physical health that our more important spiritual needs get pushed aside . ​ — Matthew 5 : 3 ; Philippians 1 : 10 . 
 We also need to show balance and reasonableness when discussing health and medical matters with others . 
 These topics should not dominate our conversations when we gather for spiritual fellowship at Christian meetings and assemblies . 
 Furthermore , medical decisions often involve Bible principles , a person’s conscience , and his relationship with Jehovah . 
 Therefore , it would be unloving to impose our views on a fellow believer or pressure him to ignore the dictates of his conscience . 
 While mature ones in the congregation may be consulted for assistance , each Christian must “ carry his own load ” of responsibility for making decisions , and “ each of us will render an account for himself to God . ” ​ — Galatians 6 : 5 ; Romans 14 : 12 , 22 , 23 . 
 When We Are Under Stress 
 How can stressful circumstances present a challenge ? 
 Stressful circumstances can cause even loyal servants of Jehovah to speak or act unwisely . 
 When under severe trial , Job became somewhat unbalanced and had to have his thinking corrected . 
 Although “ Moses was by far the meekest of all the men who were upon the surface of the ground , ” on one occasion he became provoked and spoke rashly . 
 David had shown admirable self - control in not striking down King Saul , but when Nabal insulted him and screamed abuses at his men , David became infuriated and lost his good judgment . 
 Only when Abigail intervened did he regain his senses , narrowly avoiding a calamitous mistake . ​ — 1 Samuel 24 : 2 - 7 ; 25 : 9 - 13 , 32 , 33 . 
 What can help us to avoid acting rashly ? 
 We too may face stressful situations that could rob us of our good judgment . 
 Carefully weighing the viewpoints of others , as David did , can help us to avoid acting rashly and hastening into sin . 
 Further , God’s Word admonishes us : “ Be agitated , but do not sin . 
 Have your say in your heart , upon your bed , and keep silent . ” 
 Where possible , it is wise to wait until we are calm before taking action or making decisions . 
 We can turn to Jehovah in fervent prayer , “ and the peace of God that excels all thought will guard [ our ] hearts and [ our ] mental powers by means of Christ Jesus . ” 
 This God - given calmness will stabilize us and help us to keep our senses completely . 
 Why must we rely upon Jehovah to keep our senses completely ? 
 In spite of our best efforts to avoid dangers and act wisely , all of us make mistakes . 
 We could be about to take a ruinous false step and be completely unaware of it . 
 More than that , as human creatures , we have neither the ability nor the right to direct our own step apart from Jehovah . 
 How grateful we are that he assures us : “ I shall make you have insight and instruct you in the way you should go . 
 I will give advice with my eye upon you . ” 
 Yes , with Jehovah’s help , we can keep our senses completely . 
 [ Footnotes ] 
 For more information on written business agreements , see The Watchtower , August 1 , 1997 , pages 30 - 1 ; November 15 , 1986 , pages 16 - 17 ; and Awake ! , February 8 , 1983 , pages 13 - 15 , published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 This approach will likewise benefit those who are considering controversial alternative forms of treating some ailment . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 How can we keep our senses 
 • if offered a business opportunity ? 
 • when seeking a marriage mate ? 
 • when facing health problems ? 
 • when under stress ? 
 [ Box on page 25 ] 
 Can You Trust It ? 
 The following disclaimers appear on Web sites for singles : 
 “ Even with our best efforts there is no guarantee of an individual’s true identity . ” 
 “ We do not guarantee the accuracy , completeness , or usefulness of any information on the service . ” 
 “ Opinions , advice , statements , offers , or other information or content made available through [ this ] service are those of their respective authors . . . and should not necessarily be relied upon . ” 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 “ The shrewd one considers his steps ” 
 [ Pictures on page 24 , 25 ] 
 How can Christian women imitate the Shulammite maiden ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 “ Make sure of all things ; hold fast to what is fine ” 
 “ Each One Will Carry His Own Load ” 
 “ Each of us will render an account for himself to God . ” ​ — ROMANS 14 : 12 . 
 What responsibility did three young Hebrews face up to ? 
 THREE young Hebrews living in Babylon face a life - and - death decision . 
 Should they bow down to a huge image , as required by the law of the land ? 
 Or should they refuse to worship it and be thrown into a burning fiery furnace ? 
 Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego do not have time to consult anyone ; neither do they need to do so . 
 Without hesitation , they declare : “ Let it become known to you , O king , that your gods are not the ones we are serving , and the image of gold that you have set up we will not worship . ” 
 The three Hebrews carried their own load of responsibility . 
 Who , in effect , made Pilate’s decision regarding Jesus Christ , and did that free the Roman governor from accountability ? 
 Some six centuries later , the governor has heard the charges against the man . 
 Upon examining the case , he becomes convinced that the accused is innocent . 
 The crowd , though , demands his execution . 
 After putting forth some resistance , the governor proves reluctant to carry his load of responsibility and gives in to pressure . 
 Washing his hands , he states : “ I am innocent of the blood of this man . ” 
 Then he hands the man over to be impaled . 
 Yes , instead of shouldering his responsibility to make a decision regarding Jesus Christ , Pontius Pilate lets others decide for him . 
 No amount of water can absolve him of his accountability for passing that unjust sentence upon Jesus . ​ — Matthew 27 : 11 - 26 ; Luke 23 : 13 - 25 . 
 Why should we not let others make decisions for us ? 
 What about you ? 
 When called upon to make decisions , are you like the three Hebrews , or do you allow others to make up your mind ? 
 Decision - making is not easy . 
 It takes maturity to make right choices . 
 For instance , parents need to make good decisions for their minor children . 
 Of course , making a decision is very difficult when the situation is complex and various factors have to be weighed . 
 However , the responsibility of making decisions is not so weighty as to be included among “ the burdens , ” or “ troublesome things , ” that those with “ spiritual qualifications ” may carry for us . 
 Rather , it is a load for which “ each of us will render an account for himself to God . ” 
 “ Each one will carry his own load , ” states the Bible . 
 How , then , can we make wise decisions in life ? 
 First , we must recognize our human limitations and learn what is needed to compensate for them . 
 A Key Requirement 
 What vital lesson about making decisions should we learn from the disobedience of the first human couple ? 
 Early in human history , the first couple made a decision that brought disastrous consequences . 
 They chose to eat of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and bad . 
 What was the basis for their decision ? 
 “ The woman saw that the tree was good for food and that it was something to be longed for to the eyes , yes , the tree was desirable to look upon , ” says the Bible . 
 “ So she began taking of its fruit and eating it . 
 Afterward she gave some also to her husband when with her and he began eating it . ” 
 Eve’s choice was based on selfish desire . 
 Her action led Adam to join her . 
 As a result , sin and death “ spread to all men . ” 
 Adam and Eve’s disobedience should teach us a vital lesson concerning man’s limitations : Unless he adheres to divine guidance , man is prone to make wrong decisions . 
 What guidance has Jehovah provided for us , and what must we do to benefit from it ? 
 How glad we can be that Jehovah God has not left us without direction ! 
 The Scriptures tell us : “ Your own ears will hear a word behind you saying : ‘ This is the way . 
 Walk in it , you people , ’ in case you people should go to the right or in case you should go to the left . ” 
 Jehovah speaks to us through his inspired Word , the Bible . 
 We must study the Scriptures and acquire accurate knowledge of them . 
 To make correct choices , we should partake of “ solid food [ that ] belongs to mature people . ” 
 “ Through use , ” we also “ have [ our ] perceptive powers trained to distinguish both right and wrong . ” 
 We can train our perceptive powers by applying what we learn from God’s Word . 
 What is necessary for our conscience to function properly ? 
 Essential to the decision - making process is our inherited faculty of conscience . 
 This faculty has the ability to render judgment , and we can be “ accused or even excused ” by it . 
 For our conscience to function properly , however , it must be illuminated with the accurate knowledge of God’s Word and made sensitive by application of that Word . 
 An unenlightened conscience is easily influenced by local customs and habits . 
 Our surroundings and the opinions of other people can also misguide us . 
 What happens to our conscience when its proddings are repeatedly ignored and divine standards are violated ? 
 It can , in time , come to be marked “ as with a branding iron , ” becoming like seared flesh covered over with scar tissue ​ — insensitive and unresponsive . 
 On the other hand , a conscience trained by God’s Word is a safe guide . 
 What is a key requirement in making wise decisions ? 
 A key requirement for shouldering the responsibility to make wise decisions , then , is an accurate knowledge of the Scriptures and the ability to apply it . 
 Rather than impulsively jumping to conclusions when faced with choices , we ought to take time to search for godly principles and exercise our thinking ability in applying them . 
 Even when called upon to make an on - the - spot decision ​ — as were Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego — ​ we are well - equipped if we have accurate knowledge of God’s Word and our conscience has been trained by it . 
 To see how pressing on to maturity can sharpen our decision - making ability , let us consider two areas of life . 
 Who Will Be Our Associates ? 
 8 , 9 . ( a ) What principles show the necessity of avoiding bad associations ? 
 ( b ) Does having bad association refer only to direct fellowship with unprincipled people ? 
 Explain . 
 “ Do not be misled , ” wrote the apostle Paul . 
 “ Bad associations spoil useful habits . ” 
 Jesus Christ told his disciples : “ You are no part of the world . ” 
 Upon learning these principles , we quickly see the need to avoid fellowship with fornicators , adulterers , thieves , drunkards , and the like . 
 As we progress in knowledge of Bible truth , though , we realize that spending time with such individuals by watching them in movies , on television , or on computer screens or by reading about them in books is just as damaging . 
 The same can be said of associating in Internet chat rooms “ with those who hide what they are . ” ​ — Psalm 26 : 4 . 
 What about having close association with those who may be morally clean but who lack faith in the true God ? 
 The Scriptures tell us : “ The whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one . ” 
 We come to discern that bad associations are not limited to permissive or morally debased people . 
 Hence , we are wise to cultivate close friendships only with those who love Jehovah . 
 What helps us to make mature decisions with respect to our contact with the world ? 
 Completely avoiding contact with those in the world is neither possible nor required . 
 Sharing in the Christian ministry , attending school , going to work all involve contact with the world . 
 A Christian married to an unbeliever may have to rub shoulders with the world more than others do . 
 Having our perceptive powers trained , however , we appreciate that it is one thing to have necessary limited contact with the world and quite another to cultivate close ties with it . 
 Thus , we are able to make mature decisions as to whether we will participate in extracurricular activities at school , such as sports events and dances , and attend parties and dinners arranged for fellow employees . 
 Choosing Employment 
 What is the first consideration in making employment decisions ? 
 Applying Bible principles in a mature way helps us in making decisions about how we fulfill our obligation to ‘ provide for the members of our household . ’ 
 The first consideration is the nature of the work itself ​ — what it requires us to do . 
 Choosing a type of work that promotes what is directly condemned in the Bible is definitely wrong . 
 So true Christians do not accept jobs that may involve idolatry , stealing , misuse of blood , or other unscriptural practices . 
 We would also not lie or cheat , even if an employer demands that we do so . ​ — Acts 15 : 29 ; Revelation 21 : 8 . 
 12 , 13 . 
 What are some factors besides the work itself that are significant in making employment decisions ? 
 What if the work itself does not specifically violate any divine requirement ? 
 As we grow in knowledge of the truth and our perceptive powers improve , we come to discern other criteria that must be considered . 
 What if the work would involve us in an unscriptural practice , such as answering phones at a gambling establishment ? 
 The source of pay and the location of the employment also enter into the picture . 
 For example , would a Christian who is a self - employed contractor bid on a job that involves painting one of the churches of Christendom and thereby share in helping to promote false religion ? ​ — 2 Corinthians 6 : 14 - 16 . 
 What if on one occasion our employer accepts a contract to beautify a place of false worship ? 
 In this case , we would need to consider such factors as the extent of our having authority over what is being done and the degree of our involvement . 
 And what about performing a legitimate service , such as delivering mail everywhere in a community , including places that promote wrong practices ? 
 Would not the principle stated at Matthew 5 : 45 have a bearing ? 
 Not to be overlooked is how doing the work day in and day out might affect our conscience . 
 Indeed , carrying our load of responsibility in making mature decisions regarding employment calls for us to sharpen our perceptive powers and train our God - given faculty of conscience . 
 “ In All Your Ways Take Notice of Him ” 
 In making decisions , what measures should we take ? 
 What about the decisions we make regarding other matters , such as pursuing secular education and accepting or rejecting certain medical treatment ? 
 When we are faced with making any decision , we must ascertain pertinent Bible principles and then use our mental faculties in applying them . 
 “ Trust in Jehovah with all your heart and do not lean upon your own understanding , ” said wise King Solomon of ancient Israel . 
 “ In all your ways take notice of him , and he himself will make your paths straight . ” ​ — Proverbs 3 : 5 , 6 . 
 What do we learn from the first - century Christians about making decisions ? 
 Often , the choices we make affect others , and we need to give consideration to this . 
 The first - century Christians , for example , were no longer under many of the dietary restrictions of the Mosaic Law . 
 They could choose to eat certain foods that were considered unclean under the Law and were not objectionable in other ways . 
 However , the apostle Paul wrote about meat of an animal that might have some link with an idol temple : “ If food makes my brother stumble , I will never again eat flesh at all , that I may not make my brother stumble . ” 
 The early Christians were encouraged to show consideration for the consciences of others so as not to stumble them . 
 Our decisions should not make us “ causes for stumbling . ” ​ — 1 Corinthians 10 : 29 , 32 . 
 Seek Godly Wisdom 
 How is prayer a help to us in making decisions ? 
 An invaluable aid in making decisions is prayer . 
 “ If any one of you is lacking in wisdom , ” says the disciple James , “ let him keep on asking God , for he gives generously to all and without reproaching ; and it will be given him . ” 
 With confidence , we can turn to Jehovah in prayer and ask for the needed wisdom to make proper decisions . 
 As we talk to the true God about our concerns and seek his guidance , holy spirit may help us better understand the scriptures that we are considering and bring to mind those we may have overlooked . 
 How can others help us in the decision - making process ? 
 Can others help us in making decisions ? 
 Yes , Jehovah has provided mature individuals in the congregation . 
 They can be consulted , particularly if the decision is a major one . 
 Individuals who have deep spiritual insight and are experienced in life can bring to our attention additional godly principles that may have a bearing on our decision and help us to “ make sure of the more important things . ” 
 However , a word of caution is appropriate : We must be careful not to let others make decisions for us . 
 The load of responsibility is ours to bear . 
 The Outcome ​ — Always Good ? 
 What can be said about the outcome of a good decision ? 
 Will decisions that are solidly grounded on Bible principles and made conscientiously always lead to a good outcome ? 
 Yes , in the long run . 
 At times , though , the short - term effect may bring adversity . 
 Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego knew that death might be the outcome of their decision not to worship the huge image . 
 Similarly , after the apostles told the Jewish Sanhedrin that they must obey God as ruler rather than men , they were flogged before being set free . 
 Moreover , “ time and unforeseen occurrence ” may adversely affect the result of any decision . 
 If we suffer in some way despite having made a right decision , we can be confident that Jehovah will help us to endure and will bless us in the end . ​ — 2 Corinthians 4 : 7 . 
 How can we courageously carry our own load of responsibility in making decisions ? 
 When making decisions , then , we must seek out Scriptural principles and use our mental ability to apply them . 
 How grateful we can be for the help Jehovah has provided by means of his holy spirit and the mature ones in the congregation ! 
 With such guidance and provisions , let us courageously carry our own load of responsibility in making wise decisions . 
 What Did You Learn ? 
 • What is a key requirement for making good decisions ? 
 • How does progressing to maturity affect our choice of associates ? 
 • What are some important factors that we ought to consider when making decisions regarding employment ? 
 • What help is available in making decisions ? 
 [ Picture on page 22 ] 
 Adam and Eve’s disobedience teaches us a vital lesson 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 Before making an important decision , search out godly principles 
 Keep Clear of False Worship ! 
 “ ‘ Get out from among them , and separate yourselves , ’ says Jehovah , ‘ and quit touching the unclean thing . ’ ” ​ — 2 CORINTHIANS 6 : 17 . 
 In what spiritual condition do many sincere people find themselves ? 
 MANY sincere people do not know the truth about God and the future of mankind . 
 Not having found answers to their deepest spiritual concerns , they live in confusion and uncertainty . 
 Millions are enslaved to superstitions , rituals , and celebrations that offend our Creator . 
 Likely , you have neighbors and relatives who believe in a fiery hell , a triune God , the immortality of the soul , or some other false teaching . 
 What have religious leaders done , and with what result ? 
 What is responsible for this widespread spiritual darkness ? 
 Ironically , it is religion ​ — specifically the religious organizations and leaders who have promoted ideas contrary to God’s thoughts . 
 As a result , many people have been deceived into believing that they worship the true God , while in reality they offend him . 
 False religion is directly responsible for this sad situation . 
 Who is the principal promoter of false religion , and how is he described in the Bible ? 
 There is an unseen entity behind false religion . 
 Referring to him , the apostle Paul said : “ The god of this system of things has blinded the minds of the unbelievers , that the illumination of the glorious good news about the Christ , who is the image of God , might not shine through . ” 
 “ The god of this system of things ” is none other than Satan the Devil . 
 He is the principal promoter of false worship . 
 “ Satan himself keeps transforming himself into an angel of light , ” wrote Paul . 
 “ It is therefore nothing great if his ministers also keep transforming themselves into ministers of righteousness . ” 
 Satan makes bad things appear good and deceives people into believing lies . 
 What did God’s Law to ancient Israel say about false prophets ? 
 No wonder the Bible strongly condemns false religion ! 
 For instance , the Mosaic Law specifically warned God’s chosen people against false prophets . 
 Anyone promoting untrue teachings and the worship of false gods was to be ‘ put to death for speaking of revolt against Jehovah . ’ 
 The Israelites were commanded ‘ to clear out what was evil from their midst . ’ 
 Yes , Jehovah views false religion as evil . ​ — Ezekiel 13 : 3 . 
 What warnings should we heed today ? 
 Jesus Christ and his apostles reflected Jehovah’s strong feelings about false religion . 
 Jesus warned his disciples : “ Be on the watch for the false prophets that come to you in sheep’s covering , but inside they are ravenous wolves . ” 
 Paul wrote that “ God’s wrath is being revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who are suppressing the truth . ” 
 How vital that true Christians heed these warnings and stay clear of anyone who suppresses the truth of God’s Word or spreads false teachings ! ​ — 1 John 4 : 1 . 
 Flee From “ Babylon the Great ” 
 How is “ Babylon the Great ” portrayed in the Bible ? 
 Consider how the Bible book of Revelation describes false religion . 
 It is portrayed as a drunken prostitute who has power over many kingdoms and their peoples . 
 This figurative woman commits fornication with many kings and is drunk with the blood of God’s true worshippers . 
 She has a name written on her forehead that matches her filthy and repulsive conduct . 
 The name is “ Babylon the Great , the mother of the harlots and of the disgusting things of the earth . ” ​ — Revelation 17 : 5 . 
 7 , 8 . 
 How has false religion prostituted herself , and with what results ? 
 The Scriptural description of Babylon the Great fits the world’s collective body of false religion . 
 Although the thousands of religions are not formally united as one world organization , they are inseparably joined in purpose and deed . 
 As depicted by the immoral woman in Revelation , false religion has tremendous influence over governments . 
 Resembling a woman not faithful to her marriage vows , false religion has prostituted herself by forming alliances with one political power after another . 
 “ Adulteresses , do you not know that the friendship with the world is enmity with God ? ” 
 wrote the disciple James . 
 “ Whoever , therefore , wants to be a friend of the world is constituting himself an enemy of God . ” ​ — James 4 : 4 . 
 This mixing of false religion with the governments has resulted in much human suffering . 
 African political analyst Dr . 
 Xolela Mangcu observed that “ world history is littered with examples of mass killings caused by linking religion and politics . ” 
 One newspaper recently stated : “ The bloodiest and most dangerous disputes today . . . are wrapped in religion . ” 
 The lives of millions have been snuffed out in religiously supported conflicts . 
 Babylon the Great has even persecuted and killed God’s true servants , becoming drunk with their blood , as it were . ​ — Revelation 18 : 24 . 
 How is Jehovah’s hatred for false worship expressed in the book of Revelation ? 
 That Jehovah hates false worship is clearly seen from what happens to Babylon the Great . 
 Revelation 17 : 16 states : “ The ten horns that you saw , and the wild beast , these will hate the harlot and will make her devastated and naked , and will eat up her fleshy parts and will completely burn her with fire . ” 
 First , a huge beast mauls her to death and eats up her fleshy parts . 
 Then , whatever remains of her is completely burned . 
 Correspondingly , soon the world governments will take such action against false religion . 
 God will make it happen . 
 Babylon the Great , the world empire of false religion , is doomed to destruction . 
 “ She will never be found again . ” ​ — Revelation 18 : 21 . 
 What should be our position regarding false religion ? 
 What position should true worshippers take regarding Babylon the Great ? 
 In no uncertain terms , the Bible commands : “ Get out of her , my people , if you do not want to share with her in her sins , and if you do not want to receive part of her plagues . ” 
 Those who want to be spared must get out of false religion before it is too late . 
 When on earth , Jesus Christ foretold that in the last days , many would merely claim to follow him . 
 To such ones , he says : “ I never knew you ! 
 Get away from me , you workers of lawlessness . ” 
 The now enthroned King , Jesus Christ , has nothing to do with false religion . 
 Keep Clear ​ — How ? 
 What should we do to keep clear of false worship ? 
 True Christians keep clear of false worship , rejecting false religious teachings . 
 This means that we avoid exposure to religious programs on radio and television as well as religious literature that promotes lies about God and his Word . 
 We also wisely refrain from sharing in social functions and recreational activities sponsored by any organization associated with false religion . 
 Additionally , we do not support false worship in any way . 
 Taking such measures protects us from being carried off by someone “ as his prey through the philosophy and empty deception according to the tradition of men , according to the elementary things of the world and not according to Christ . ” ​ — Colossians 2 : 8 . 
 How can a person break free from any connection with false religious organizations ? 
 What if a person who wishes to become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses is currently a registered member of a false religion ? 
 In most cases , a letter of resignation serves as evidence that a person no longer wants to be viewed as a member of a false religion . 
 It is especially important that the person take decisive action to avoid completely any kind of spiritual contamination from false worship . 
 The actions of a prospective Witness should make it clear to the religious organization and observers in general that he has ended that religious affiliation . 
 What counsel does the Bible offer regarding the need to keep clear of false worship ? 
 “ Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers , ” wrote the apostle Paul . 
 “ For what fellowship do righteousness and lawlessness have ? 
 Or what sharing does light have with darkness ? 
 Further , what harmony is there between Christ and Belial ? 
 Or what portion does a faithful person have with an unbeliever ? 
 And what agreement does God’s temple have with idols ? . . . 
 ‘ Therefore get out from among them , and separate yourselves , ’ says Jehovah , ‘ and quit touching the unclean thing . ’ ” 
 We heed these words by keeping clear of false worship . 
 Does Paul’s advice require that we also stay away from false worshippers ? 
 “ Go On Walking in Wisdom ” 
 Must we completely avoid those who engage in false worship ? 
 Explain . 
 Should true worshippers shun all contact with people who engage in false worship ? 
 Should we hold ourselves completely aloof from those who do not share our faith ? 
 The answer is no . 
 The second of the two greatest commandments states : “ You must love your neighbor as yourself . ” 
 We certainly display love for our neighbors when we share with them the good news of the Kingdom . 
 Our love for them is also shown when we study the Bible with them and make them aware of the need to keep clear of false worship . 
 What does it mean to be “ no part of the world ” ? 
 Although we preach the good news to our neighbors , as Jesus ’ followers we are “ no part of the world . ” 
 The term “ world ” here refers to human society alienated from God . 
 We are separate from the world in that we shun attitudes , speech , and conduct that offend Jehovah . 
 Moreover , in harmony with the principle that “ bad associations spoil useful habits , ” we avoid intimacy with those who do not live by Christian standards . 
 To be no part of the world is to remain “ without spot from the world . ” 
 Hence , being separate from the world does not mean that we physically withdraw from all contact with other people . ​ — John 17 : 15 , 16 ; 1 Corinthians 5 : 9 , 10 . 
 16 , 17 . 
 How should Christians treat those who are not acquainted with Bible truth ? 
 How , then , are we to treat those who are not acquainted with Bible truths ? 
 To the congregation in Colossae , Paul wrote : “ Go on walking in wisdom toward those on the outside , buying out the opportune time for yourselves . 
 Let your utterance be always with graciousness , seasoned with salt , so as to know how you ought to give an answer to each one . ” 
 The apostle Peter wrote : “ Sanctify the Christ as Lord in your hearts , always ready to make a defense before everyone that demands of you a reason for the hope in you , but doing so together with a mild temper and deep respect . ” 
 Paul counseled Christians “ to speak injuriously of no one , not to be belligerent , to be reasonable , exhibiting all mildness toward all men . ” ​ — Titus 3 : 2 . 
 As Jehovah’s Witnesses , we avoid being harsh or arrogant toward others . 
 We certainly do not use derogatory terms to describe people of other religions . 
 Instead , we are tactful , even if the householder , neighbor , or workmate is unkind or uses abusive terms . ​ — Colossians 4 : 6 ; 2 Timothy 2 : 24 . 
 “ Keep Holding the Pattern of Healthful Words ” 
 What deplorable spiritual condition is experienced by those who regress to false worship ? 
 After learning Bible truths , how tragic it would be if one regressed to false worship ! 
 The Bible describes the sad consequences of such a course when it says : “ Certainly if , after having escaped from the defilements of the world by an accurate knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ , they get involved again with these very things and are overcome , the final conditions have become worse for them than the first . . . . 
 The saying of the true proverb has happened to them : ‘ The dog has returned to its own vomit , and the sow that was bathed to rolling in the mire . ’ ” ​ — 2 Peter 2 : 20 - 22 . 
 Why is it vital to remain alert to anything that can endanger our spirituality ? 
 We must remain alert to anything that can endanger our spirituality . 
 The dangers are real ! 
 The apostle Paul warns : “ The inspired utterance says definitely that in later periods of time some will fall away from the faith , paying attention to misleading inspired utterances and teachings of demons . ” 
 We live in “ later periods of time . ” 
 Those who do not keep clear of false worship can be “ tossed about as by waves and carried hither and thither by every wind of teaching by means of the trickery of men , by means of cunning in contriving error . ” ​ — Ephesians 4 : 13 , 14 . 
 How can we protect ourselves against the damaging influence of false religion ? 
 How can we protect ourselves against the damaging influence of false religion ? 
 Consider all that Jehovah has provided . 
 We have God’s Word , the Bible . 
 Jehovah has also provided abundant spiritual food through “ the faithful and discreet slave . ” 
 As we progress in the truth , should we not cultivate a taste for ‘ solid food that belongs to mature people ’ and a desire to come together where we learn spiritual truths ? 
 Let us be determined to take full advantage of Jehovah’s provisions so that we can “ keep holding the pattern of healthful words ” that we have heard . 
 Thus we can keep clear of false worship . 
 What Have You Learned ? 
 • What is “ Babylon the Great ” ? 
 • What must we do to keep clear of false religion ? 
 • What dangers to our spirituality should we avoid ? 
 [ Picture on page 28 ] 
 Do you know why “ Babylon the Great ” is portrayed as an immoral woman ? 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 “ Babylon the Great ” is doomed to destruction 
 [ Picture on page 31 ] 
 We display “ a mild temper and deep respect ” toward those who do not share our beliefs 
 ‘ Go and Make Disciples , Baptizing Them ’ 
 “ Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations , baptizing them . . . , teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you . ” ​ — Matthew 28 : 19 , 20 . 
 What decision did the nation of Israel make at the foot of Mount Sinai ? 
 SOME 3,500 years ago , a whole nation made a vow to God . 
 Assembled at the foot of Mount Sinai , the Israelites declared publicly : “ All that Jehovah has spoken we are willing to do . ” 
 From that moment on , Israel became a people dedicated to God , his “ special property . ” 
 They looked forward to receiving his protection and living generation after generation in a land “ flowing with milk and honey . ” ​ — Leviticus 20 : 24 . 
 What relationship with God can people today enjoy ? 
 As the psalmist Asaph acknowledged , however , the Israelites “ did not keep the covenant of God , and in his law they refused to walk . ” 
 They failed to keep the vow that their forefathers had made to Jehovah . 
 Eventually , the nation lost that unique relationship with God . 
 God , therefore , “ turned his attention to the nations to take out of them a people for his name . ” 
 And in these last days , he is gathering together “ a great crowd , which no man [ is ] able to number , out of all nations and tribes and peoples and tongues , ” who joyfully acknowledge : “ Salvation we owe to our God , who is seated on the throne , and to the Lamb . ” ​ — Revelation 7 : 9 , 10 . 
 What steps must one take to enjoy a personal relationship with God ? 
 To be among those who enjoy that precious relationship with God , one must make a dedication to Jehovah and symbolize it publicly by water baptism . 
 This is in obedience to Jesus ’ direct command to his disciples : “ Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations , baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit , teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you . ” 
 The Israelites listened to a reading of “ the book of the covenant . ” 
 Thus , they understood their obligations toward Jehovah . 
 Likewise today , an accurate knowledge of God’s will as found in his Word , the Bible , is essential before one takes the step of baptism . 
 What must one do to qualify for baptism ? 
 ( Include the box above . ) 
 Clearly , Jesus intended for his disciples to have a solid foundation for their faith before they would get baptized . 
 He instructed his followers not only to go and make disciples but also to teach them ‘ to observe all the things he had commanded . ’ 
 Therefore , those who qualify for baptism have usually studied the Bible for months or even a year or two , so that their decision is neither hasty nor ill - informed . 
 At the baptism itself , the candidates answer yes to two key questions . 
 Since Jesus emphasized that ‘ our Yes should mean Yes , our No , No , ’ it will be helpful for all of us to review carefully the significance of these two baptismal questions . ​ — Matthew 5 : 37 . 
 Repentance and Dedication 
 What two fundamental steps does the first baptismal question emphasize ? 
 The first baptismal question asks the candidate if he has repented of his former life course and dedicated his life to Jehovah to do his will . 
 This question emphasizes two vital steps that must be taken prior to baptism , namely repentance and dedication . 
 6 , 7 . ( a ) Why is repentance necessary for all baptismal candidates ? 
 ( b ) What changes must be made after one has repented ? 
 Why must a person repent before presenting himself for baptism ? 
 The apostle Paul explains : “ We all at one time conducted ourselves in harmony with the desires of our flesh . ” 
 Before we came to an accurate knowledge of God’s will , we lived in harmony with the world , according to its values and standards . 
 Our life course was under the control of the god of this system , Satan . 
 Having come to know God’s will , however , we resolve to live “ no more for the desires of men , but for God’s will . ” ​ — 1 Peter 4 : 2 . 
 This new course brings many rewards . 
 Above all , it opens the way to a precious relationship with Jehovah , which David compared to an invitation to enter into God’s “ tent ” and “ holy mountain ” ​ — a grand privilege indeed . 
 Logically , Jehovah would invite not just anyone but only those “ walking faultlessly and practicing righteousness and speaking the truth in [ their ] heart . ” 
 Depending on our circumstances before we learned the truth , meeting these requirements may mean that we must make certain changes ​ — both in conduct and in personality . 
 The motivation for such changes is repentance ​ — deep regret over our former life course and a strong determination to please Jehovah . 
 This leads to a complete turnabout ​ — abandoning a selfish , worldly way of life and pursuing a course pleasing to God . ​ — Acts 3 : 19 . 
 How do we make our dedication , and what connection does it have with baptism ? 
 The second part of the first baptismal question asks the candidates if they have dedicated themselves to Jehovah to do his will . 
 Dedication is an essential step that must precede baptism . 
 It is made in prayer , in which we express the desire to give our life to Jehovah through Christ . 
 Jehovah then becomes our Master and Owner , and like Jesus we delight to do God’s will . 
 This solemn promise to Jehovah is made only once . 
 Since we make our dedication in private , however , a public declaration on the day of baptism serves to let everyone know that we have made this solemn dedication to our heavenly Father . ​ — Romans 10 : 10 . 
 9 , 10 . ( a ) What does doing God’s will involve ? 
 ( b ) How did even Nazi officials recognize our dedication ? 
 What does following Jesus ’ example in doing God’s will involve ? 
 Jesus said to his disciples : “ If anyone wants to come after me , let him disown himself and pick up his torture stake and continually follow me . ” 
 Here he outlined three things that we must do . 
 First , we “ disown ” ourselves . 
 In other words , we say no to our selfish , imperfect inclinations and yes to God’s counsel and direction . 
 Second , we ‘ pick up our torture stake . ’ 
 In Jesus ’ day a torture stake was a symbol of shame and suffering . 
 As Christians , we accept our part in suffering for the sake of the good news . 
 Although the world may ridicule or reproach us , like Christ we ‘ despise shame , ’ happy in the knowledge that we are pleasing God . 
 Finally , we follow Jesus “ continually . ” ​ — Psalm 73 : 26 ; 119 : 44 ; 145 : 2 . 
 Interestingly , even some opposers recognize the dedication that Jehovah’s Witnesses have made to God to serve him unreservedly . 
 For example , in the Buchenwald concentration camp of Nazi Germany , Witnesses who refused to renounce their faith were required to sign the following printed statement : “ I am still a committed Bible Student and will never break the oath I have sworn to Jehovah . ” 
 Surely this well expresses the attitude of all dedicated , faithful servants of God ! ​ — Acts 5 : 32 . 
 Identified as One of Jehovah’s Witnesses 
 What privilege comes to one who gets baptized ? 
 The second question asks the candidate , first of all , if he understands that his baptism serves to identify him as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 After undergoing immersion , he becomes an ordained minister who bears Jehovah’s name . 
 This is both a great privilege and a serious responsibility . 
 It also puts the one baptized in line for eternal salvation , provided he remains faithful to Jehovah . ​ — Matthew 24 : 13 . 
 What obligation accompanies the honor of bearing Jehovah’s name ? 
 Certainly , it is a singular honor to bear the name of the almighty God , Jehovah . 
 The prophet Micah said : “ All the peoples , for their part , will walk each one in the name of its god ; but we , for our part , shall walk in the name of Jehovah our God to time indefinite , even forever . ” 
 Nevertheless , an obligation accompanies this honor . 
 We must strive to live our life in a way that brings honor to the name we bear . 
 As Paul reminded the Christians in Rome , if one does not practice what one preaches , the name of God is “ blasphemed , ” or brought into disrepute . ​ — Romans 2 : 21 - 24 . 
 Why do dedicated servants of Jehovah have the responsibility to witness about their God ? 
 When a person becomes one of Jehovah’s Witnesses , he also assumes the responsibility to witness about his God . 
 Jehovah invited the dedicated nation of Israel to be his witnesses in order to testify to his eternal Godship . 
 But the nation failed to fulfill this role , and they eventually lost Jehovah’s favor completely . 
 Today , true Christians are proud to have the privilege of bearing witness to Jehovah . 
 We do so because we love him and long for his name to be sanctified . 
 How can we be silent when we know the truth about our heavenly Father and his purpose ? 
 We feel as did the apostle Paul when he said : “ Necessity is laid upon me . 
 Really , woe is me if I did not declare the good news ! ” ​ — 1 Corinthians 9 : 16 . 
 14 , 15 . ( a ) What role does Jehovah’s organization play in our spiritual growth ? 
 ( b ) What provisions are available to help us spiritually ? 
 The second question also reminds the candidate of his responsibility to work with Jehovah’s spirit - directed organization . 
 We are not alone in serving God , and we need the help , support , and encouragement of “ the whole association of brothers . ” 
 God’s organization plays a vital role in our spiritual growth . 
 It provides a wealth of Bible publications that help us to grow in accurate knowledge , to act wisely when we are faced with problems , and to cultivate a close relationship with God . 
 Like a mother who makes sure that her child is well - fed and cared for , “ the faithful and discreet slave ” provides an abundance of timely spiritual food for our spiritual advancement . ​ — Matthew 24 : 45 - 47 ; 1 Thessalonians 2 : 7 , 8 . 
 At weekly meetings , Jehovah’s people receive the needed training and encouragement to be faithful Witnesses of Jehovah . 
 The Theocratic Ministry School teaches us to speak in public , and the Service Meeting trains us to present our message effectively . 
 Both at our meetings and through our personal study of Bible publications , we can see Jehovah’s spirit at work , directing his organization . 
 By means of these regular provisions , God alerts us to dangers , trains us to be effective ministers , and helps us to keep spiritually awake . ​ — Psalm 19 : 7 , 8 , 11 ; 1 Thessalonians 5 : 6 , 11 ; 1 Timothy 4 : 13 . 
 The Motivation Behind the Decision 
 What motivates us to dedicate ourselves to Jehovah ? 
 The two baptismal questions thus remind the candidates of the significance of water baptism and the responsibilities it brings . 
 What , then , should motivate them to make the decision to get baptized ? 
 We become baptized disciples , not because someone forces us , but because Jehovah “ draws ” us . 
 Since “ God is love , ” he rules the universe by love , not by force . 
 We are drawn to Jehovah by his kind qualities and by the way he deals with us . 
 Jehovah gave his only - begotten Son for us and offers us the best possible future . 
 In turn , we are moved to offer him ​ — to dedicate to him — ​ our life . ​ — Proverbs 3 : 9 ; 2 Corinthians 5 : 14 , 15 . 
 To what have we not dedicated ourselves ? 
 We dedicate ourselves , not to a cause or to a work , but to Jehovah himself . 
 The work that God has for his people will change , but their dedication to him remains the same . 
 For example , what he told Abraham to do was very different from what he told Jeremiah to do . 
 Yet , both of them carried out the specific task God gave them to do because they loved Jehovah and desired to do his will faithfully . 
 During this time of the end , all baptized followers of Christ strive to carry out Christ’s command to preach the Kingdom good news and to make disciples . 
 Doing that work wholeheartedly is a fine way to show that we love our heavenly Father and that we are truly dedicated to him . ​ — 1 John 5 : 3 . 
 18 , 19 . ( a ) What public statement do we make by means of our baptism ? 
 ( b ) What will be considered in the following article ? 
 Without a doubt , baptism opens up the way to many blessings , but it is not a step to be taken lightly . 
 It expresses a resolve that takes priority over every other responsibility . 
 When we get baptized , we are really making the public statement : “ This God is our God to time indefinite , even forever . 
 He himself will guide us until we die . ” ​ — Psalm 48 : 14 . 
 The following article will examine further questions that may arise in connection with water baptism . 
 Might there be valid reasons for a person to hold back from getting baptized ? 
 Should age be a factor ? 
 How can all contribute to the dignity of the occasion of baptism ? 
 Can You Explain ? 
 • Why does each Christian need to repent before baptism ? 
 • What does dedication to God involve ? 
 • What responsibilities come with the honor of bearing Jehovah’s name ? 
 • What should motivate us to make the decision to be baptized ? 
 [ Box / ​ Picture on page 22 ] 
 The Two Baptismal Questions 
 On the basis of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ , have you repented of your sins and dedicated yourself to Jehovah to do his will ? 
 Do you understand that your dedication and baptism identify you as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses in association with God’s spirit - directed organization ? 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 Dedication is a solemn promise made to Jehovah in prayer 
 [ Picture on page 25 ] 
 Our preaching work demonstrates our dedication to God 
 Meeting the Requirements for Christian Baptism 
 “ What prevents me from getting baptized ? ” ​ — ACTS 8 : 36 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 How did Philip strike up a conversation with an Ethiopian official , and what attests to the spiritual inclination of this man ? 
 A YEAR or two after the death of Jesus , a government official was traveling south on the road from Jerusalem to Gaza . 
 A tiring chariot ride of perhaps a thousand miles [ 1,500 km ] lay ahead . 
 This devout man had journeyed all the way from Ethiopia to Jerusalem to worship Jehovah . 
 On the lengthy return trip , he was making wise use of his time by reading the Word of God ​ — such was the man’s faith . 
 Jehovah took note of this sincere man , and by means of an angel , He directed the disciple Philip to preach to him . ​ — Acts 8 : 26 - 28 . 
 Philip found it easy to strike up a conversation , since the Ethiopian official was reading aloud , as was the custom in those days . 
 Hence , Philip was able to hear that he was reading from the scroll of Isaiah . 
 One simple question from Philip aroused the man’s interest : “ Do you actually know what you are reading ? ” 
 This led to a discussion of Isaiah 53 : 7 , 8 . 
 Finally , Philip “ declared to him the good news about Jesus . ” ​ — Acts 8 : 29 - 35 . 
 3 , 4 . ( a ) Why did Philip baptize the Ethiopian without delay ? 
 ( b ) What questions will we now consider ? 
 Within a short time , the Ethiopian understood Jesus ’ role in God’s purpose , along with the need to become a baptized disciple of Christ . 
 “ What prevents me from getting baptized ? ” 
 he asked Philip upon sighting a convenient body of water . 
 Of course , these were special circumstances . 
 Here was a man of faith who already worshipped God as a Jewish proselyte . 
 He would probably not have another opportunity to get baptized for a long time . 
 More important , this man understood what God required of him , and he wanted to respond unreservedly . 
 Philip happily consented to his request , and the Ethiopian , after being baptized , “ kept going on his way rejoicing . ” 
 He doubtless became an enthusiastic preacher of the good news in his home country . ​ — Acts 8 : 36 - 39 . 
 Although the steps of dedication and baptism are not to be taken lightly or hastily , the example of the Ethiopian official shows that there have been occasions when individuals were baptized shortly after hearing the truth of God’s Word . 
 * Thus , it is appropriate to consider the following questions : What sort of preparation should precede baptism ? 
 To what extent should age be a factor ? 
 What spiritual progress should be evident before a person is baptized ? 
 Above all , why does Jehovah require his servants to take this step ? 
 A Solemn Agreement 
 5 , 6 . ( a ) How did God’s people in the past respond to Jehovah’s love ? 
 ( b ) What close relationship with God can we enjoy once we are baptized ? 
 After delivering the Israelites from Egypt , Jehovah offered to accept them as his “ special property , ” to love and protect them and to constitute them “ a holy nation . ” 
 To receive such blessings , however , the people had to respond to God’s love in a concrete way . 
 This they did by agreeing to do ‘ all that Jehovah had spoken ’ and entering into a covenant with him . 
 In the first century , Jesus commanded his followers to make disciples of people of all nations , and those who embraced his teaching were baptized . 
 A good relationship with God depended on faith in Jesus Christ followed by baptism . ​ — Matthew 28 : 19 , 20 ; Acts 2 : 38 , 41 . 
 These Scriptural accounts show that Jehovah blesses those who make and keep a solemn agreement to serve him . 
 For Christians , dedication and baptism are necessary steps that lead to Jehovah’s blessing . 
 We are resolved to follow his ways and seek his guidance . 
 Jehovah , in turn , figuratively grasps us by the hand and leads us in the way in which we should walk . ​ — Psalm 73 : 23 ; Isaiah 30 : 21 ; 41 : 10 , 13 . 
 Why must dedication and baptism be a personal decision ? 
 The motivation for us to take these steps should be love for Jehovah and a desire to serve him . 
 No one should get baptized merely because someone tells him that he has studied long enough or because his friends are getting baptized . 
 Naturally , parents and other mature Christians may encourage a person to think about dedication and baptism . 
 The apostle Peter urged those who heard him at Pentecost to “ be baptized . ” 
 Nevertheless , our dedication is a personal matter , and nobody else can make it for us . 
 The decision to do God’s will must be our own . ​ — Psalm 40 : 8 . 
 Adequate Preparation for Baptism 
 8 , 9 . ( a ) Why is infant baptism Scripturally unacceptable ? 
 ( b ) What spiritual progress should young ones have made before baptism ? 
 Are children in a position to make an intelligent dedication ? 
 The Scriptures give no age requirements for baptism . 
 Still , infants certainly could not become believers , exercise faith , or make a dedication to God . 
 Regarding first - century Christians , historian Augustus Neander states in his book General History of the Christian Religion and Church : “ Baptism was administered at first only to adults , as men were accustomed to conceive baptism and faith as strictly connected . ” 
 In the case of youths , some develop a measure of spirituality at a relatively tender age , while others take longer . 
 Before getting baptized , however , a youngster should have a personal relationship with Jehovah , a sound understanding of the fundamentals of the Scriptures , and a clear comprehension of what dedication involves , as is the case with adults . 
 What steps must precede dedication and baptism ? 
 Jesus instructed his disciples to teach new ones all the things he had commanded . 
 So first of all , the new ones need to acquire an accurate knowledge of the truth , which in turn would enable them to develop faith in Jehovah and in his Word . 
 Then , when Scriptural truth touches a person’s heart , it moves him to repent and turn around from his previous way of life . 
 Finally , the person reaches the point where he desires to dedicate himself to Jehovah and get baptized , as Jesus commanded . 
 Why is it important that we regularly share in the preaching work before baptism ? 
 Another important step in the progress toward baptism is that of sharing in preaching the Kingdom good news . 
 This is the principal work that Jehovah has assigned his people during these last days . 
 Unbaptized publishers can thus have the joy of speaking about their faith to others . 
 Sharing in this work also equips them for regular and zealous participation in the field ministry after baptism . ​ — Romans 10 : 9 , 10 , 14 , 15 . 
 Does Something Prevent You From Getting Baptized ? 
 What may hold some back from getting baptized ? 
 Certain ones may hold back from baptism because they are reluctant to accept the responsibility it brings . 
 They realize that to meet Jehovah’s standards , they will have to make significant changes in their lives . 
 Or they may fear that they will find it difficult to live up to God’s requirements after baptism . 
 Some may even reason , “ Maybe one day I will do something bad and be disfellowshipped from the congregation . ” 
 In Jesus ’ day , what held certain ones back from becoming Jesus ’ followers ? 
 In Jesus ’ day , some allowed personal interests and family ties to hinder them from becoming his disciples . 
 One scribe declared that he would follow Jesus wherever He went . 
 But Jesus pointed out that on many occasions , he did not even have a place to spend the night . 
 When Jesus invited another listener to be his follower , this man replied that he would first need to “ bury ” his father . 
 Likely , he preferred to stay at home and wait until his father died rather than follow Jesus and care for that family responsibility when it came . 
 Finally , a third said that before following Jesus , he needed to “ say good - bye ” to his household . 
 Jesus described such procrastination as ‘ looking at the things behind . ’ 
 Thus , it appears that those who wish to do so will always be able to find excuses for evading their Christian responsibility . ​ — Luke 9 : 57 - 62 . 
 ( a ) How did Peter , Andrew , James , and John respond when Jesus invited them to become fishers of men ? 
 ( b ) Why should we not hesitate to accept Jesus ’ yoke ? 
 The example of Peter , Andrew , James , and John stands in sharp contrast . 
 When Jesus invited them to follow him and become fishers of men , the Bible states : “ At once abandoning the nets , they followed him . ” 
 By readily making that decision , they personally experienced what Jesus later told them : “ Take my yoke upon you and learn from me , for I am mild - tempered and lowly in heart , and you will find refreshment for your souls . 
 For my yoke is kindly and my load is light . ” 
 While baptism does bring a yoke of responsibility , Jesus assures us that it is a kindly and bearable one that will refresh us immensely . 
 How do the examples of Moses and Jeremiah show that we can rely on receiving God’s support ? 
 Feelings of inadequacy , of course , are normal . 
 Both Moses and Jeremiah initially felt incapable of handling the assignments Jehovah gave them . 
 How did God reassure them ? 
 “ I shall prove to be with you , ” he told Moses . 
 “ I am with you to deliver you , ” he promised Jeremiah . 
 We too can have confidence in divine support . 
 Love for God and trust in him can help us to overcome lingering doubts about whether we will be able to live up to our dedication . 
 “ There is no fear in love , ” wrote the apostle John , “ but perfect love throws fear outside . ” 
 A little boy may be fearful when he has to walk alone , but he is confident when he walks hand in hand with his father . 
 Likewise , if we trust in Jehovah with all our heart , he promises to ‘ make our paths straight ’ as we walk alongside him . ​ — Proverbs 3 : 5 , 6 . 
 A Dignified Occasion 
 Why does baptism involve total immersion in water ? 
 The baptism itself is usually preceded by a Scriptural talk explaining the significance of Christian baptism . 
 At the conclusion of this talk , candidates are asked to make a public declaration of their faith by answering the two baptismal questions . 
 The candidates are then immersed in water , following the pattern set by Jesus himself . 
 The Bible shows that after getting baptized , Jesus “ came up from the water ” or “ out of the water . ” 
 Clearly , John the Baptizer had immersed Jesus totally . 
 * Complete immersion appropriately symbolizes the dramatic change we have made in our life ​ — we figuratively die to our former life course and begin life anew in the service of God . 
 How can both the baptism candidates and the observers contribute to the dignity of the occasion ? 
 Baptism is both a serious and a joyful occasion . 
 The Bible indicates that Jesus was praying when John immersed him in the Jordan River . 
 In harmony with this example , baptism candidates today should show proper decorum . 
 And since the Bible urges us to dress with modesty in everyday life , how much more so should we heed this counsel on the day of our baptism ! 
 Observers can also show due respect by listening carefully to the baptism discourse and by observing the event in an orderly manner . ​ — 1 Corinthians 14 : 40 . 
 Blessings Enjoyed by Baptized Disciples 
 18 , 19 . 
 What privileges and blessings does baptism bring ? 
 Once we have dedicated ourselves to God and are baptized , we become part of a unique family . 
 First of all , Jehovah becomes our Father and our Friend . 
 We were alienated from God before our baptism ; now we become reconciled . 
 Through the sacrifice of Christ , we have drawn close to God and he draws close to us . 
 The prophet Malachi describes how Jehovah pays attention and listens to those who use and bear his name , and he includes their names in his book of remembrance . 
 “ They will certainly become mine , ” God says , “ and I will show compassion upon them , just as a man shows compassion upon his son who is serving him . ” ​ — Malachi 3 : 16 - 18 . 
 Baptism also enables us to become part of a worldwide brotherhood . 
 When the apostle Peter asked what blessings Christ’s disciples would receive for the sacrifices they had made , Jesus promised : “ Everyone that has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands for the sake of my name will receive many times more and will inherit everlasting life . ” 
 Years later , Peter wrote about “ the whole association of brothers ” that had developed “ in the world . ” 
 Peter had personally experienced the support and blessings of a loving brotherhood , and we can too . ​ — 1 Peter 2 : 17 ; 5 : 9 . 
 What blessed prospect does baptism offer ? 
 Furthermore , Jesus indicated that those who follow him “ will inherit everlasting life . ” 
 Yes , dedication and baptism offer the prospect of gaining “ a firm hold on the real life ” ​ — everlasting life in God’s new world . 
 What better foundation for the future could we possibly build for ourselves and for our families ? 
 This blessed prospect will enable us to “ walk in the name of Jehovah our God to time indefinite , even forever . ” ​ — Micah 4 : 5 . 
 [ Footnotes ] 
 The three thousand Jews and proselytes who listened to Peter’s speech at Pentecost likewise got baptized without delay . 
 Of course , like the Ethiopian eunuch , they were already familiar with the basic teachings and principles of God’s Word . ​ — Acts 2 : 37 - 41 . 
 The Greek word baʹpti·sma ( baptism ) signifies “ the processes of immersion , submersion and emergence , ” according to Vine’s Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words . 
 Can You Explain ? 
 • How and why should we respond to Jehovah’s love ? 
 • What spiritual progress should precede baptism ? 
 • Why should we not allow fear of failure or reluctance to accept responsibility to hold us back from baptism ? 
 • What unique blessings can baptized disciples of Jesus Christ enjoy ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 “ What prevents me from getting baptized ? ” 
 [ Pictures on page 29 ] 
 Baptism is both a serious and a joyous occasion 
 “ I Am With You People ” 
 “ The messenger of Jehovah went on to say : . . . 
 ‘ “ I am with you people , ” is the utterance of Jehovah . ’ ” ​ — HAGGAI 1 : 13 . 
 To what prophetic parallel for our day did Jesus refer ? 
 WE ARE living at a momentous time in history . 
 As evidenced by the fulfillment of Bible prophecy , since 1914 we have been in “ the Lord’s day . ” 
 You may well have studied this subject , so you know that Jesus compared “ the days of the Son of man ” in Kingdom power to “ the days of Noah ” and “ the days of Lot . ” 
 The Bible thus indicates that this is a prophetic parallel . 
 Yet , there is another parallel that deserves our serious consideration . 
 To what role did Jehovah assign Haggai and Zechariah ? 
 Let us consider a situation that existed back in the days of the Hebrew prophets Haggai and Zechariah . 
 What message did those two faithful prophets provide that has pointed application for Jehovah’s people in our time ? 
 Haggai and Zechariah were ‘ messengers of Jehovah ’ to the Jews after their return from captivity in Babylon . 
 They were commissioned to assure the Israelites of God’s backing in rebuilding the temple . 
 Though the books that Haggai and Zechariah wrote are short , they are part of “ all Scripture [ that ] is inspired of God and beneficial for teaching , for reproving , for setting things straight , for disciplining in righteousness . ” ​ — 2 Timothy 3 : 16 . 
 They Should Concern Us 
 3 , 4 . 
 Why should Haggai and Zechariah’s messages be of interest to us ? 
 Certainly , the messages of Haggai and Zechariah were beneficial to the Jews of their day , and their prophecies had a fulfillment back then . 
 Why , though , can we be sure that these two books should be of concern to us today ? 
 We find a clue at Hebrews 12 : 26 - 29 . 
 There the apostle Paul quotes from Haggai 2 : 6 , which speaks of God’s “ rocking the heavens and the earth . ” 
 The rocking would ultimately “ overthrow the throne of kingdoms and annihilate the strength of the kingdoms of the nations . ” ​ — Haggai 2 : 22 . 
 In quoting Haggai , Paul states what is to happen to “ the kingdoms of the nations ” and speaks of the superiority of the unshakable Kingdom that anointed Christians will receive . 
 You can see from this that the prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah point to a time that was still future when the book of Hebrews was written in the first century of our Common Era . 
 There still is on earth today a remnant of anointed Christians , who are heirs of the Messianic Kingdom with Jesus . 
 Hence , Haggai and Zechariah must have import for our time . 
 5 , 6 . 
 What was the background of Haggai and Zechariah’s service ? 
 The book of Ezra provides some historical background . 
 After the Jews returned from captivity in Babylon in 537 B.C.E . , Governor Zerubbabel and High Priest Joshua ( or Jeshua ) supervised the laying of the foundation of the new temple in 536 B.C.E . 
 While that was cause for great rejoicing , before long , fright began to come upon the Jews . 
 Adversaries , “ the people of the land , ” says Ezra 4 : 4 , “ were continually weakening the hands of the people of Judah and disheartening them from building . ” 
 Such enemies , particularly Samaritans , made false accusations against the Jews . 
 These opposers induced the king of Persia to ban the temple construction work . ​ — Ezra 4 : 10 - 21 . 
 Initial enthusiasm for the temple work waned . 
 The Jews turned to personal interests . 
 However , in 520 B.C.E . , 16 years after the foundation of the temple was laid , Jehovah raised up Haggai and Zechariah to stir up the people to renew the work on the temple . 
 Roused by God’s messengers and having clear evidence of Jehovah’s backing , the Jews resumed the work on the temple and completed it in 515 B.C.E . ​ — Ezra 6 : 14 , 15 . 
 The situation in the prophets ’ day has what parallel in modern times ? 
 Do you know the significance of all of this for us ? 
 We have work to do in connection with the preaching of the “ good news of the kingdom . ” 
 That work took on special emphasis after World War I . 
 Just as the ancient Jews were released from literal captivity in Babylon , so Jehovah’s modern - day people were freed from captivity to Babylon the Great , the world empire of false religion . 
 God’s anointed ones applied themselves to the work of preaching , teaching , and directing people to true worship . 
 That work continues today on an even greater scale , and you may be sharing in it . 
 Now is the time for it to be done , for the end of this wicked system is just ahead ! 
 This God - ordained work must continue until Jehovah intervenes in human affairs at the “ great tribulation . ” 
 That will clear away wickedness and allow true worship to flourish fully on earth . 
 Why can we be confident of God’s backing on our work ? 
 As the prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah show , we can be certain of Jehovah’s backing and blessing as we share wholeheartedly in this work . 
 Despite the efforts of some to suppress God’s servants or ban their assigned work , no government has been able to halt the progress of the evangelizing work . 
 Think of how Jehovah has blessed the Kingdom work with increase over the decades following World War I and right up to our time . 
 There is still , though , much to do . 
 To what ancient situation should we give attention , and why ? 
 How can what we learn from Haggai and Zechariah stir us even more to obey the divine command to preach and to teach ? 
 Well , let us take note of some lessons that we might draw from these two Bible books . 
 For example , consider a few details that relate to the temple - building work that the restored Jews were to carry out . 
 As noted , the Jews who returned to Jerusalem from Babylon did not persevere in their work on the temple . 
 After they laid the foundation , they slacked off . 
 What mistaken viewpoint had developed among them ? 
 And what can we learn from that ? 
 Getting a Correct View 
 The Jews developed what mistaken view , and with what result ? 
 The restored Jews were saying : “ The time has not come . ” 
 When they began the temple - building work , laying the foundation in 536 B.C.E . , they were not saying that “ the time has not come . ” 
 But they soon allowed opposition from neighbors and interference from the government to affect them . 
 The Jews began putting more emphasis on their own houses and their own comforts . 
 Given the contrast between their private homes paneled with fine woods and the uncompleted temple , Jehovah asked : “ Is it the time for you yourselves to dwell in your paneled houses , while this house is waste ? ” ​ — Haggai 1 : 4 . 
 Why did Jehovah have to counsel the Jews of Haggai’s time ? 
 Yes , the priorities of the Jews had shifted . 
 Instead of keeping in first place Jehovah’s purpose to have the temple rebuilt , God’s people became focused on themselves and their dwellings . 
 Work on God’s house of worship was neglected . 
 Jehovah’s word recorded at Haggai 1 : 5 encouraged the Jews to ‘ set their heart upon their ways . ’ 
 Jehovah was telling them to stop and meditate on what they were doing and to consider how they were being affected by not keeping the temple - building work in first place in their lives . 
 12 , 13 . 
 How does Haggai 1 : 6 describe the situation of the Jews , and what does that verse mean ? 
 As you can imagine , the misplaced priorities of the Jews affected them personally . 
 Note God’s view expressed at Haggai 1 : 6 : “ You have sown much seed , but there is a bringing of little in . 
 There is an eating , but it is not to satisfaction . 
 There is a drinking , but not to the point of getting intoxicated . 
 There is a putting on of clothes , but it is not with anyone’s getting warm ; and he that is hiring himself out is hiring himself out for a bag having holes . ” 
 The Jews were in the land that God had given them , yet it was not producing as they would have liked . 
 Jehovah was withholding his blessing , as he had forewarned . 
 Without his backing , the Jews sowed seed but had a meager harvest , not enough food to satisfy them . 
 Lacking his blessing , they were unable to clothe themselves with warm garments . 
 It even seemed as if the money they earned went into a bag full of holes , with no benefit to the wage earners . 
 What of the expression : “ There is a drinking , but not to the point of getting intoxicated ” ? 
 It could not imply that getting drunk would have shown God’s blessing ; he condemns drunkenness . 
 Rather , the expression is another reference to the lack of God’s blessing on the Jews . 
 Any wine they could make would be limited , not being enough to produce intoxication . 
 The Revised Standard Version renders Haggai 1 : 6 : “ You drink , but you never have your fill . ” 
 14 , 15 . 
 What lesson do we learn from Haggai 1 : 6 ? 
 The lesson we should learn from all of that is not about home design or decorating . 
 Long before the exile , the prophet Amos had rebuked wealthy ones in Israel for their “ houses of ivory ” and for their “ lying down on couches of ivory . ” 
 The fancy houses and decorated furniture did not last . 
 Those things were plundered by enemy conquerors . 
 Yet , years later , after an exile of 70 years , many of God’s people had not learned from this . 
 Will we ? 
 It would be fitting for each of us to ask : ‘ Frankly , how much emphasis do I put on my home and its decoration ? 
 What about arranging for extra education to advance a career , though doing that would take up considerable time for a number of years , crowding out important aspects of my spiritual life ? ’ ​ — Luke 12 : 20 , 21 ; 1 Timothy 6 : 17 - 19 . 
 What we read at Haggai 1 : 6 should bring home to us our need for God’s blessing in our lives . 
 Those Jews of old lacked that , to their detriment . 
 Whether we have an abundance of material things or not , if we fail to receive Jehovah’s blessing , it will definitely be to our spiritual detriment . 
 Yet , how can we receive that blessing ? 
 Jehovah Helps by Means of His Spirit 
 16 - 18 . 
 In its ancient context , what does Zechariah 4 : 6 mean ? 
 Haggai’s fellow prophet , Zechariah , was moved to highlight the very means by which Jehovah motivated and blessed devoted ones back then . 
 And this shows how he will bless you too . 
 We read : “ ‘ Not by a military force , nor by power , but by my spirit , ’ Jehovah of armies has said . ” 
 You may often have heard this verse quoted , but what meaning did it have for the Jews in the days of Haggai and Zechariah , and thus what is its import for you ? 
 Recall that the inspired words of Haggai and Zechariah had a wonderful effect back at that time . 
 What those two prophets said reinvigorated the faithful Jews . 
 Haggai started to prophesy in the sixth month of 520 B.C.E . 
 Zechariah began to prophesy in the eighth month of that year . 
 As you can see from Haggai 2 : 18 , work on the foundation resumed in earnest in the ninth month . 
 So the Jews were stirred to action , and they obeyed Jehovah with confidence in his support . 
 The words at Zechariah 4 : 6 relate to God’s backing . 
 When the Jews returned to their homeland in 537 B.C.E . , they had no military force . 
 Nonetheless , Jehovah protected them and guided them on the trip from Babylon . 
 And his spirit was directing matters when they started the work on the temple shortly thereafter . 
 Once they began to work wholeheartedly again , he would back them by means of his holy spirit . 
 God’s spirit overcame what strong influence ? 
 Through a series of eight visions , Zechariah was assured that Jehovah would be with his people , who would faithfully carry the temple work to a finish . 
 The fourth vision , recorded in chapter 3 , shows that Satan was active in resisting the efforts of the Jews to complete the building of the temple . 
 Satan would certainly not be pleased to see High Priest Joshua perform services in behalf of the people at a new temple . 
 Although the Devil was active in hindering the Jews from building the temple , Jehovah’s spirit would play a major role in removing obstacles and energizing the Jews to move ahead until the temple was completed . 
 How did holy spirit help the Jews to carry out God’s will ? 
 It appeared as if there were an insurmountable obstacle of opposition , coming from government officials who had been able to get a ban placed on the work . 
 Yet , Jehovah promised that this seeming “ mountain ” would be removed and become “ level land . ” 
 And that happened ! 
 King Darius I made an investigation and discovered Cyrus ’ memorandum that authorized the Jews to rebuild the temple . 
 So Darius rescinded the ban and authorized that money from the royal treasury be given to the Jews to help pay the expenses of the work . 
 What an astounding reversal ! 
 Did God’s spirit play a role in this ? 
 We can be sure that it did . 
 The temple was completed in 515 B.C.E . , the sixth year of the reign of Darius I . ​ — Ezra 6 : 1 , 15 . 
 ( a ) In ancient times , how did God “ rock all the nations , ” and how did “ the desirable things ” come out ? 
 ( b ) What is the modern - day fulfillment ? 
 At Haggai 2 : 5 , the prophet reminded the Jews of the covenant that God established with them at Mount Sinai when “ the whole mountain was trembling very much . ” 
 In the days of Haggai and Zechariah , Jehovah was going to cause another shake - up , as described in the figurative language of verses 6 and 7 . 
 The state of affairs in the Persian Empire would become unsettled , but the work at the temple would move ahead to its completion . 
 Non - Jews , “ the desirable things of all the nations , ” would end up glorifying God along with the Jews in that place of worship . 
 In a major way in our time , God has ‘ rocked the nations ’ by our Christian preaching , and “ the desirable things of all the nations ” have come in to worship God alongside the anointed remnant . 
 Truly , the anointed and the other sheep together are now filling Jehovah’s house with glory . 
 Such true worshippers await with faith the time when Jehovah will ‘ rock the heavens and the earth ’ in another sense . 
 That will be in order to overthrow and annihilate the strength of the kingdoms of the nations . ​ — Haggai 2 : 22 . 
 How are the nations being ‘ rocked , ’ with what result , and what is yet to occur ? 
 We are reminded of the upheaval that has occurred in different elements pictured by “ the heavens and the earth and the sea and the dry ground . ” 
 For one thing , Satan the Devil and his demons were hurled down to the vicinity of the earth . 
 Additionally , the preaching spearheaded by God’s anointed ones has certainly rocked the earthly elements of this system of things . 
 Despite that , “ a great crowd ” of the desirable things of all the nations have joined spiritual Israel in serving Jehovah . 
 The great crowd work alongside anointed Christians in preaching the good news that soon God will rock the nations at Armageddon . 
 That event will open the way for true worship to be brought to its perfected state earth wide . 
 Do You Recall ? 
 • When and under what circumstances did Haggai and Zechariah serve ? 
 • How can you apply the message that Haggai and Zechariah conveyed ? 
 • Why do you find Zechariah 4 : 6 to be encouraging ? 
 [ Pictures on page 20 ] 
 Haggai and Zechariah’s writings assure us of God’s backing 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 “ Is it the time for you yourselves to dwell in your paneled houses , while this house is waste ? ” 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 Jehovah’s people share in reaching ‘ desirable ones of the nations ’ 
 Let Your Hands Be Strong 
 “ Let the hands of you people be strong , you who are hearing in these days these words from the mouth of the prophets . ” ​ — ZECHARIAH 8 : 9 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 Why do the books of Haggai and Zechariah deserve our attention ? 
 THE prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah were written some 2,500 years ago , yet they certainly are relevant to your life . 
 The Bible accounts found in these two books are not mere history . 
 They are part of “ all the things that were written aforetime . . . for our instruction . ” 
 Much of what we read in them makes us think of real situations that have been transpiring since the Kingdom was established in heaven in 1914 . 
 Referring to events and circumstances experienced by God’s people long before , the apostle Paul stated : “ Now these things went on befalling them as examples , and they were written for a warning to us upon whom the ends of the systems of things have arrived . ” 
 So you might well wonder , ‘ What value do the books of Haggai and Zechariah have in our day ? ’ 
 On what do Haggai and Zechariah focus ? 
 As the preceding article noted , the prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah involved the time when the Jews returned to their God - given land after their release from captivity in Babylon . 
 The two prophets gave attention to the rebuilding of the temple . 
 The Jews laid the foundation of the temple in 536 B.C.E . 
 While some older Jews focused on the past , overall there was much “ shouting for joy . ” 
 In reality , though , something even more momentous has occurred in our time . 
 How so ? ​ — Ezra 3 : 3 - 13 . 
 What took place soon after World War I ? 
 Soon after World War I , Jehovah’s anointed ones were released from captivity to Babylon the Great . 
 That represented a major indication of Jehovah’s support . 
 Earlier it seemed that religious leaders and their political associates had brought an end to the Bible Students ’ public preaching and teaching work . 
 However , Jehovah God cleared away obstacles to the preaching and disciple - making work . 
 Over the decades since 1919 , the Kingdom work has flourished and nothing has been able to stop its progress . 
 5 , 6 . 
 To what grand accomplishment does Zechariah 4 : 7 point ? 
 We can be sure that the preaching and teaching done by Jehovah’s obedient servants in our time will continue with his backing . 
 At Zechariah 4 : 7 , we read : “ He will certainly bring forth the headstone . 
 There will be shoutings to it : ‘ How charming ! 
 How charming ! ’ ” 
 To what grand accomplishment in our time does this point ? 
 Zechariah 4 : 7 is pointing to the time when true worship of the Sovereign Lord will be brought to its perfected state in the earthly courtyards of his spiritual temple . 
 That temple is Jehovah’s arrangement for approaching him in worship on the basis of the propitiatory sacrifice of Christ Jesus . 
 Granted , the great spiritual temple has existed since the first century C.E . 
 Yet , true worship in its earthly courtyard will yet be perfected . 
 Millions of worshippers now serve in the earthly courtyard of the spiritual temple . 
 These and multitudes of resurrected ones will be brought to perfection during the Thousand Year Reign of Jesus Christ . 
 At the end of the thousand years , only true worshippers of God will be left on the cleansed earth . 
 Jesus has what role regarding bringing true worship to its perfected state in our day , and why should we find that encouraging ? 
 Governor Zerubbabel and High Priest Joshua were on hand to witness the temple’s completion in 515 B.C.E . 
 Zechariah 6 : 12 , 13 foretold Jesus ’ comparable role in bringing true worship to its perfected state : “ This is what Jehovah of armies has said : ‘ Here is the man whose name is Sprout . 
 And from his own place he will sprout , and he will certainly build the temple of Jehovah . 
 And . . . he , for his part , will carry the dignity ; and he must sit down and rule on his throne , and he must become a priest upon his throne . ’ ” 
 In view of the fact that Jesus , who is in heaven and causes the Davidic line of kings to sprout , is backing the Kingdom work at the spiritual temple , do you think that anyone can hinder its progress ? 
 Not at all ! 
 Should this not encourage us to move ahead in our ministry , not getting sidetracked by everyday concerns ? 
 Priorities 
 Why must we give the work at the spiritual temple first place in our lives ? 
 In order to have Jehovah’s backing and blessing , we must keep the work at the spiritual temple in first place in our lives . 
 Unlike the Jews who said , “ The time has not come , ” we must remember that we are living in “ the last days . ” 
 Jesus foretold that his loyal followers would preach the good news of the Kingdom and make disciples . 
 We must be careful not to neglect our privilege of service . 
 The preaching and teaching work that was temporarily halted by the world’s opposition was resumed in 1919 , but it has not been completed . 
 You can be sure , though , that it certainly will be ! 
 9 , 10 . 
 On what does Jehovah’s blessing depend , meaning what to us ? 
 To the extent that we continue to work in earnest , we will be blessed ​ — as a people and as individuals . 
 Note Jehovah’s promise from which we can draw assurance . 
 Once the Jews returned in whole - souled worship and resumed in earnest their work on the foundation of the temple , Jehovah said : “ From this day I shall bestow blessing . ” 
 They would enjoy full restoration of his favor . 
 Now consider the blessings found in God’s promise : “ There will be the seed of peace ; the vine itself will give its fruitage , and the earth itself will give its yield , and the heavens themselves will give their dew ; and I shall certainly cause the remaining ones of this people to inherit all these things . ” ​ — Zechariah 8 : 9 - 13 . 
 Just as Jehovah blessed those Jews spiritually and materially , so he will bless us as we diligently , and with a happy heart , do the work he has assigned to us . 
 These blessings include peace among ourselves , security , prosperity , and spiritual growth . 
 Yet , you can be certain that God’s continued blessing depends on our doing the work at the spiritual temple in the way that Jehovah wants it done . 
 How might we analyze ourselves ? 
 Now is the time to ‘ set our heart upon our ways . ’ 
 We should take some time to analyze our priorities in life . 
 Jehovah’s blessing on us today depends on the extent to which we are magnifying his name and moving ahead in our work at his spiritual temple . 
 You might ask yourself : ‘ Have my priorities changed ? 
 How does my zeal for Jehovah , his truth , and his work compare to the zeal I had when I was baptized ? 
 Is interest in a comfortable life affecting the attention I give to Jehovah and his Kingdom ? 
 Is fear of man ​ — concern about what others will think — ​ holding me back somewhat ? ’ ​ — Revelation 2 : 2 - 4 . 
 What situation among the Jews is highlighted at Haggai 1 : 6 , 9 ? 
 We do not want God to hold back his rich blessing because of our neglecting the work of magnifying his name . 
 Recall that after getting off to a good start , the restored Jews were “ on the run , each one in behalf of his own house , ” as Haggai 1 : 9 reports . 
 They became preoccupied with their own daily needs and way of life . 
 Consequently , there was “ a bringing of little in , ” a shortage of good food , drink , and warm clothing . 
 Jehovah withdrew his blessing . 
 Is there a lesson in this for us ? 
 13 , 14 . 
 How can we apply the lesson drawn from Haggai 1 : 6 , 9 , and why is this important ? 
 Do you not agree that to continue enjoying divine blessings , we must resist seeking things for ourselves at the expense of Jehovah’s worship ? 
 That is so whether the activity or interest diverting our attention is the pursuit of wealth , get - rich - quick schemes , ambitious plans for advanced education to have a desirable career in this system , or programs for personal fulfillment . 
 Such things may not be sins in themselves . 
 However , do you not see that from the standpoint of everlasting life , those really are “ dead works ” ? 
 In what sense ? 
 They are spiritually dead , vain , and fruitless . 
 If one persists in them , such works could lead to spiritual death . 
 It happened to some anointed Christians in the apostles ’ day . 
 It has happened to some in our time . 
 You may know of some who were gradually distracted from Christian activities and from the congregation ; now they show no inclination to return to Jehovah’s service . 
 We certainly hope that such ones will return to Jehovah , but the fact is that pursuing “ dead works ” can result in the loss of Jehovah’s favor and blessing . 
 You can see how sad a development that would be . 
 It would mean the loss of the joy and peace that God’s spirit produces . 
 And imagine what a loss it would be not to share in the warm Christian brotherhood ! ​ — Galatians 1 : 6 ; 5 : 7 , 13 , 22 - 24 . 
 How does Haggai 2 : 14 show the seriousness of our worship ? 
 This is a very serious matter . 
 Note from Haggai 2 : 14 how Jehovah viewed the Jews who neglected his house of worship in favor of paneling their own houses , literally or figuratively . 
 “ ‘ That is how this people is , and that is how this nation is before me , ’ is the utterance of Jehovah , ‘ and that is how all the work of their hands is , and whatever they present there . 
 It is unclean . ’ ” 
 Whatever token sacrifices the halfhearted Jews offered up on the temporary altar in Jerusalem were unacceptable as long as they neglected true worship . ​ — Ezra 3 : 3 . 
 Guaranteed Backing 
 Based on visions Zechariah received , of what could the Jews be sure ? 
 Obedient Jews who worked at rebuilding God’s temple were assured of divine backing , as God indicated through a series of eight visions that Zechariah received . 
 The first guaranteed the completion of the temple and prosperity for Jerusalem and Judah as long as the Jews obediently carried out the work at hand . 
 The second vision promised the end of all governments that opposed true worship . 
 Other visions ensured divine protection of the building work , an influx of people of many nations to Jehovah’s completed house of worship , true peace and security , the leveling of seemingly insurmountable obstacles to the God - assigned work , a removal of wickedness , and angelic oversight and protection . 
 You can understand why with such guarantees of divine support , obedient ones adjusted their lifestyle and centered their attention on the work for which God had liberated them . 
 In view of the guarantee we have , what should we ask ourselves ? 
 Similarly , the guarantee we have of the certain triumph of true worship should stir us to activity and motivate us to think seriously about Jehovah’s house of worship . 
 Ask yourself : ‘ If I believe that now is the time to do the work of preaching the good news of the Kingdom and making disciples , do my goals and lifestyle harmonize with my conviction ? 
 Am I spending an appropriate amount of time studying God’s prophetic Word , making it my concern , and conversing about it with fellow Christians as well as with others whom I meet ? ’ 
 What lies ahead , according to Zechariah chapter 14 ? 
 Zechariah referred to the destruction of Babylon the Great followed by the war of Armageddon . 
 We read : “ It must become one day that is known as belonging to Jehovah . 
 It will not be day , neither will it be night ; and it must occur that at evening time it will become light . ” 
 Yes , Jehovah’s day will truly be a dark , cold day for his enemies on earth ! 
 But it will mean continuous light and favor for Jehovah’s faithful worshippers . 
 Zechariah also described how everything in the new world will proclaim Jehovah’s holiness . 
 True worship at God’s great spiritual temple will be the only form of worship on earth . 
 What a guarantee ! 
 We will experience the fulfillment of what was foretold and will see the vindication of Jehovah’s sovereignty . 
 How unique will be that day belonging to Jehovah ! 
 Permanent Blessings 
 19 , 20 . 
 Why do you find Zechariah 14 : 8 , 9 encouraging ? 
 Following that stupendous accomplishment , Satan and his demons will be confined to an abyss of inactivity . 
 Then blessings will flow during Christ’s Thousand Year Reign . 
 Zechariah 14 : 8 , 9 says : “ It must occur in that day that living waters will go forth from Jerusalem , half of them to the eastern sea and half of them to the western sea . 
 In summer and in winter it will occur . 
 And Jehovah must become king over all the earth . 
 In that day Jehovah will prove to be one , and his name one . ” 
 “ Living waters , ” or “ a river of water of life , ” picturing Jehovah’s provisions for life , will continuously flow from the seat of the Messianic Kingdom . 
 A great crowd of Jehovah’s worshippers , having survived Armageddon , will benefit by being released from the condemnation of Adamic death . 
 Even those who are already dead will benefit by means of a resurrection . 
 Thus will begin a new phase of Jehovah’s rulership over the earth . 
 Humans earth wide will recognize Jehovah as the Universal Sovereign , the only one to be worshipped . 
 What should be our resolve ? 
 In view of all that Haggai and Zechariah foretold and all that has been fulfilled , we have solid reason to move ahead in the work that God has assigned us to do in the earthly courtyards of his spiritual temple . 
 Until true worship is brought to its perfected state , may we all strive to keep Kingdom interests in first place . 
 Zechariah 8 : 9 urges us : “ Let the hands of you people be strong , you who are hearing in these days these words from the mouth of the prophets . ” 
 Do You Recall ? 
 • What historical parallel makes the books of Haggai and Zechariah relevant today ? 
 • Haggai and Zechariah offer us what lesson about priorities ? 
 • Why does considering Haggai and Zechariah give us reason for confidence about the future ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 Haggai and Zechariah encouraged the Jews to work whole - souled and thus receive a blessing 
 [ Pictures on page 27 ] 
 Are you ‘ on the run in behalf of your own house ’ ? 
 [ Picture on page 28 ] 
 Jehovah promised a blessing , and he has given it 
 Shepherds Who Are “ Examples to the Flock ” 
 “ Shepherd the flock of God in your care . . . willingly . . . , eagerly . . . , becoming examples to the flock . ” ​ — 1 PETER 5 : 2 , 3 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) Jesus entrusted the apostle Peter with what privilege , and why was Jesus ’ confidence not misplaced ? 
 ( b ) How does Jehovah feel about appointed shepherds ? 
 SOME time before Pentecost 33 C.E . , Peter and six other disciples were eating a breakfast that Jesus had prepared on the shores of the Sea of Galilee . 
 This was not the first time Peter had seen the resurrected Jesus , and he was no doubt thrilled to know that Jesus was alive . 
 But Peter may also have been anxious . 
 After all , just a few days earlier , he had publicly denied ever knowing Jesus . 
 Did Jesus reprimand the repentant Peter for his lack of faith ? 
 No . 
 Instead , he entrusted Peter with the privilege of feeding and shepherding Jesus ’ “ little sheep . ” 
 As the Bible account of the history of the first - century Christian congregation shows , Jesus ’ confidence in Peter was not misplaced . 
 Together with the other apostles and older men in Jerusalem , Peter went on to shepherd the Christian congregation through a period of intense trials and rapid expansion . ​ — Acts 1 : 15 - 26 ; 2 : 14 ; 15 : 6 - 9 . 
 Today , Jehovah through Jesus Christ has appointed qualified men to serve as spiritual shepherds to lead His sheep through the most critical times in human history . 
 Has such confidence been misplaced ? 
 The peaceful Christian brotherhood that exists worldwide proves otherwise . 
 True , these shepherds are fallible humans , as was Peter . 
 Even so , Jehovah trusts them to care for the sheep that “ he purchased with the blood of his own Son . ” 
 Jehovah has deep affection for these men , considering them “ worthy of double honor . ” ​ — 1 Timothy 5 : 17 . 
 How do spiritual shepherds maintain a willing and eager spirit ? 
 How do spiritual shepherds maintain a willing and eager spirit , thus becoming examples to the flock ? 
 Like Peter and the other first - century shepherds , they rely on God’s holy spirit , which gives them the strength they need in order to carry their load of responsibility . 
 Holy spirit also produces in them the fruitage of the spirit ​ — love , joy , peace , long - suffering , kindness , goodness , faith , mildness , and self - control . 
 Let us consider some specific ways in which shepherds can set an example in displaying this fruitage as they shepherd the flock of God under their care . 
 Love Both the Flock and Each Individual Sheep 
 4 , 5 . ( a ) How do Jehovah and Jesus show love for the flock ? 
 ( b ) What are some ways in which spiritual shepherds display love for the flock ? 
 The foremost quality produced by God’s spirit is love . 
 Jehovah manifests his love for the flock as a whole when he provides it with an abundance of spiritual food . 
 Yet , he does more than just feed the flock . 
 He feels a personal attachment to each individual sheep . 
 Jesus too loves the flock . 
 He surrendered his soul in its behalf , and he knows each sheep personally , “ by name . ” ​ — John 10 : 3 , 14 - 16 . 
 Spiritual shepherds imitate Jehovah and Jesus . 
 They display love for God’s flock as a whole by “ applying [ themselves ] to teaching ” the congregation . 
 Their Bible - based talks help feed and protect the flock , and their hard work in this regard is visible to all . 
 Less visible is the time they spend maintaining records , processing correspondence , making schedules , and caring for numerous other details in order to ensure that congregation meetings and other activities take place “ decently and by arrangement . ” 
 Much of this work is done out of public view and may receive little recognition . 
 It is truly a labor of love . ​ — Galatians 5 : 13 . 
 6 , 7 . ( a ) What is one way in which shepherds become better acquainted with the sheep ? 
 ( b ) Why is it sometimes beneficial to share our feelings with an elder ? 
 Loving Christian shepherds endeavor to show personal interest in each sheep in the congregation . 
 One way shepherds become better acquainted with individual sheep is by working side by side with them in the public preaching work . 
 Jesus often had his followers with him in the preaching work and used such occasions to give encouragement . 
 One experienced Christian shepherd says : “ I find that one of the best ways to get to know and encourage a brother or a sister is by working with him or her in the field ministry . ” 
 If you have not recently had the opportunity to work with one of the elders in the field ministry , why not make arrangements to do this soon ? 
 Love moved Jesus to share in the joys and sorrows of his followers . 
 For example , when 70 of his disciples returned with joy from their preaching , Jesus became “ overjoyed . ” 
 However , when he saw the effect Lazarus ’ death had on Mary and her family members and friends , “ Jesus gave way to tears . ” 
 Likewise , caring shepherds today are not emotionally distant from the sheep . 
 Love moves them to “ rejoice with people who rejoice ” and to “ weep with people who weep . ” 
 If you experience either joy or sadness in your life , feel free to share your feelings with Christian shepherds . 
 Hearing of your joy will encourage them . 
 Learning about your trials will enable them to strengthen and comfort you . ​ — 1 Thessalonians 1 : 6 ; 3 : 1 - 3 . 
 8 , 9 . ( a ) How did one elder show love for his wife ? 
 ( b ) How important is it for a shepherd to display love for his family ? 
 The love a shepherd has for the flock is particularly evident in the way he treats his own family . 
 If he is married , the love and honor he shows his wife sets an example for other husbands to imitate . 
 Consider the comments of a Christian woman named Linda . 
 Her husband served as an overseer for more than 20 years before his death . 
 She says : “ My husband was always very busy caring for the congregation . 
 But he made me feel that I was part of a team . 
 He often expressed appreciation for my support , and he spent his spare time with me . 
 As a result , I felt loved and was not jealous of the time he spent serving the congregation . ” 
 If a Christian shepherd has children , the way he lovingly disciplines and regularly commends these little ones provides a model for other parents to follow . 
 In fact , the love he shows for his family furnishes ongoing evidence that he lives up to the trust conferred upon him by reason of his appointment by holy spirit . ​ — 1 Timothy 3 : 4 , 5 . 
 Promote Joy and Peace by Communicating 
 ( a ) What can have a negative impact on the joy and peace of the congregation ? 
 ( b ) What issue threatened the peace of the first - century congregation , and how was that issue resolved ? 
 The holy spirit can produce joy and peace in the heart of an individual Christian , among a body of elders , and in the congregation as a whole . 
 However , a lack of open communication can have a negative impact on this joy and peace . 
 Solomon of old observed : “ There is a frustrating of plans where there is no confidential talk . ” 
 On the other hand , respectful and frank communication promotes joy and peace . 
 For example , when the circumcision issue threatened to disrupt the peace of the first - century congregation , the governing body in Jerusalem sought the direction of holy spirit . 
 They also expressed their differing views on the subject . 
 After much lively discussion , they arrived at a decision . 
 When they communicated their unanimous decision to the congregations , the brothers “ rejoiced over the encouragement . ” 
 Joy and peace were promoted . 
 How can elders promote joy and peace in the congregation ? 
 Likewise today , shepherds promote joy and peace in the congregation by being good communicators . 
 When problems threaten the peace of the congregation , they meet together and openly express their feelings . 
 They respectfully listen to their fellow shepherds ’ comments . 
 After praying for holy spirit , they base their decisions on Bible principles and on guidelines published by “ the faithful and discreet slave . ” 
 Once a Scripturally sound decision has been made by the body of elders , each elder yields to the direction of holy spirit by supporting that decision even if his personal opinion was not endorsed by the majority . 
 Such modesty promotes joy and peace and sets a fine example for the sheep in how to walk with God . 
 Are you modestly cooperating with the Bible - based decisions made by the shepherds in the congregation ? 
 Be Long - Suffering and Kind 
 Why did Jesus need to be long - suffering and kind in his dealings with the apostles ? 
 Jesus was long - suffering and kind in his dealings with the apostles , despite their repeated failings . 
 For example , time and again Jesus tried to impress upon them the need to be humble . 
 Yet , on the final night of Jesus ’ earthly life , after he had just given them a lesson in humility by washing their feet , “ there also arose a heated dispute among them over which one of them seemed to be greatest . ” 
 Did Jesus berate the apostles ? 
 No , he kindly reasoned with them , stating : “ Which one is greater , the one reclining at the table or the one ministering ? 
 Is it not the one reclining at the table ? 
 But I am in your midst as the one ministering . ” 
 Jesus ’ long - suffering and kindness ​ — coupled with his good example — ​ eventually touched the apostles ’ hearts . 
 13 , 14 . 
 When especially must shepherds be kind ? 
 Similarly , a spiritual shepherd may need to offer counsel repeatedly to a person regarding a certain failing . 
 The shepherd could become exasperated with the individual . 
 However , keeping in mind his own failings as he ‘ admonishes the disorderly , ’ he is able to show long - suffering and kindness toward his brother . 
 That way he imitates Jesus and Jehovah , who show these qualities toward all Christians ​ — including shepherds . ​ — 1 Thessalonians 5 : 14 ; James 2 : 13 . 
 At times , shepherds may need to offer strong counsel to one who has committed a serious sin . 
 If the individual is unrepentant , the shepherds must remove the erring one from the congregation . 
 Even so , the manner in which they deal with that person shows that they hate the sin , not the sinner . 
 A kind manner on the part of the shepherds may make it easier for a straying sheep eventually to return to the fold . ​ — Luke 15 : 11 - 24 . 
 Good Acts Are Motivated by Faith 
 What is one way in which shepherds imitate Jehovah’s goodness , and what motivates them to do so ? 
 “ Jehovah is good to all , ” even to those who do not appreciate what he does for them . 
 Jehovah’s goodness is especially evident in that he sends his people to preach the “ good news of the kingdom . ” 
 Shepherds reflect God’s goodness by taking the lead in this preaching work . 
 What motivates their tireless efforts ? 
 Strong faith in Jehovah and in his promises . ​ — Romans 10 : 10 , 13 , 14 . 
 How can shepherds “ work what is good ” toward the sheep ? 
 In addition to working “ what is good toward all ” by preaching , shepherds have the responsibility to work what is good “ especially toward those related to [ them ] in the faith . ” 
 One way they do this is by making encouraging shepherding visits . 
 “ I enjoy making shepherding visits , ” says one elder . 
 “ They give me the opportunity to commend the brothers and sisters for their efforts and to help them realize that their hard work is appreciated . ” 
 At times , shepherds may suggest ways in which an individual can improve in his service to Jehovah . 
 In doing so , wise shepherds imitate the apostle Paul . 
 Consider the way he appealed to the brothers in Thessalonica : “ We have confidence in the Lord regarding you , that you are doing and will go on doing the things we order . ” 
 Such expressions of confidence appeal to the good inclinations of the sheep and make it easier for them to “ be obedient to those who are taking the lead . ” 
 When you receive an encouraging shepherding visit , why not express appreciation for it ? 
 Mildness Requires Self - Control 
 What lesson did Peter learn from Jesus ? 
 Jesus was mild - tempered , even when he was provoked . 
 When he was betrayed and arrested , Jesus displayed mildness and great self - control . 
 Impulsively , Peter drew a sword and retaliated . 
 But Jesus reminded him : “ Do you think that I cannot appeal to my Father to supply me at this moment more than twelve legions of angels ? ” 
 Peter learned the lesson well and later reminded Christians : “ Christ suffered for you , leaving you a model for you to follow his steps closely . . . . 
 When he was being reviled , he did not go reviling in return . 
 When he was suffering , he did not go threatening . ” ​ — 1 Peter 2 : 21 - 23 . 
 18 , 19 . ( a ) When particularly must shepherds display mildness and self - control ? 
 ( b ) What questions will we consider next ? 
 Likewise , effective shepherds are mild - tempered even when they are treated unfairly . 
 For instance , some whom they try to help in the congregation may not react favorably . 
 If the individual in need of help is spiritually injured or sick , he may respond to counsel by “ speaking thoughtlessly as with the stabs of a sword . ” 
 However , like Jesus , shepherds do not retaliate with sharp words or vengeful actions . 
 Instead , they exercise self - restraint and still show fellow feeling , which may prove to be a blessing to the one in need of help . 
 Do you learn from the example of the elders and display mildness and self - control when you receive counsel ? 
 Without a doubt , Jehovah and Jesus appreciate the hard work of the thousands of shepherds who willingly tend the worldwide flock . 
 Jehovah and his Son also have deep affection for the thousands of ministerial servants who support the elders in ‘ ministering to the holy ones . ’ 
 Why , then , may some baptized brothers hesitate to reach out for this “ fine work ” ? 
 And how does Jehovah train those whom he appoints as shepherds ? 
 We will consider these questions in the next article . 
 Do You Recall ? 
 • What are some ways in which shepherds show love for the flock ? 
 • How can all in the congregation promote joy and peace ? 
 • Why are shepherds long - suffering and kind when giving counsel ? 
 • How do elders display goodness and faith ? 
 [ Picture on page 18 ] 
 Elders are motivated by love to serve the congregation 
 [ Pictures on page 18 ] 
 They also spend time with their families both in recreation . . . 
 . . and in the ministry 
 [ Picture on page 20 ] 
 Good communication among the elders promotes joy and peace in the congregation 
 Jehovah Trains Shepherds for His Flock 
 “ Jehovah himself gives wisdom ; out of his mouth there are knowledge and discernment . ” ​ — PROVERBS 2 : 6 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 Why do baptized men reach out for increased responsibility in the congregation ? 
 “ I WAS very happy when I was appointed as an elder , ” says Nick , who has served as an overseer for seven years . 
 “ I saw this privilege as an opportunity to expand my service to Jehovah . 
 I felt that I owed him a debt of gratitude for all that he has done for me . 
 I also wanted to help the members of the congregation to the fullest extent possible , to assist them in the same way that other elders have assisted me . ” 
 However , mingled with his joy were some concerns . 
 “ Since I was only in my late 20 ’ s when I was appointed , ” Nick continues , “ I worried that I would lack the needed skills ​ — the discernment and wisdom — ​ to shepherd the congregation effectively . ” 
 Those whom Jehovah appoints to care for his flock have many reasons to be happy . 
 The apostle Paul reminded the elders from Ephesus of one reason when , quoting Jesus , he said : “ There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving . ” 
 Serving as a ministerial servant or as an elder provides baptized men with additional ways to give to Jehovah and to the congregation . 
 Ministerial servants , for example , work along with the elders . 
 These servants also care for numerous other time - consuming but necessary assignments . 
 Such brothers are motivated by love for God and neighbor to render valuable service . ​ — Mark 12 : 30 , 31 . 
 Why may some hesitate to reach out for congregation privileges ? 
 What about a Christian man who may hesitate to reach out for the privilege of being a servant and eventually an elder because he feels inadequate ? 
 Like Nick , he may worry that he does not have the needed skills to be an effective shepherd . 
 As a baptized brother , are you among those who feel this way ? 
 Such concerns are not groundless . 
 Jehovah holds appointed shepherds accountable for the way they treat the flock . 
 Jesus said : “ Everyone to whom much was given , much will be demanded of him ; and the one whom people put in charge of much , they will demand more than usual of him . ” ​ — Luke 12 : 48 . 
 How does Jehovah assist those whom he appoints to care for his sheep ? 
 Does Jehovah expect those whom he appoints as servants and elders to carry the extra load by themselves ? 
 On the contrary , he provides practical assistance that enables them not only to cope but also to thrive . 
 As discussed in the preceding article , Jehovah gives them his holy spirit , the fruitage of which helps them to care tenderly for the sheep . 
 In addition , Jehovah gives them wisdom , knowledge , and discernment . 
 How does he do this ? 
 Let us discuss three ways in which Jehovah trains individuals whom he appoints to care for his sheep . 
 Trained by Experienced Shepherds 
 Why were Peter and John effective shepherds ? 
 When the apostles Peter and John stood before the Sanhedrin , the worldly - wise judges of that court considered the men before them to be “ unlettered and ordinary . ” 
 Oh , they could read and write , but they had not received any rabbinic training in study of the Scriptures . 
 Even so , Peter and John along with the other disciples had proved to be effective teachers , moving many of those who listened to them to become believers . 
 How did these ordinary men become such extraordinary teachers ? 
 After listening to Peter and John , the court “ began to recognize about them that they used to be with Jesus . ” 
 True , they had received holy spirit . 
 But it was also obvious ​ — even to those spiritually blind judges — ​ that Jesus had trained those men . 
 While he was with them on earth , Jesus taught the apostles not only how to gather sheeplike ones but also how to shepherd them once they became part of the fold . ​ — Matthew 11 : 29 ; 20 : 24 - 28 ; 1 Peter 5 : 4 . 
 What example in training others did Jesus and Paul set ? 
 After Jesus was resurrected , he continued to train those appointed as shepherds . 
 For example , he personally selected Paul and supervised his training . 
 Paul appreciated the training he received and passed on to other elders what he had learned . 
 For instance , he invested much time and energy in training Timothy to be “ a workman ” in God’s service , “ with nothing to be ashamed of . ” 
 A close bond formed between these men . 
 Earlier , Paul wrote of Timothy : “ Like a child with a father he slaved with me in furtherance of the good news . ” 
 Paul did not seek to make Timothy or any other person a disciple of himself . 
 Rather , he encouraged fellow believers to become ‘ imitators of him , even as he was of Christ . ’ ​ — 1 Corinthians 11 : 1 . 
 7 , 8 . ( a ) What experience shows the good that results when elders imitate Jesus and Paul ? 
 ( b ) When should elders begin to train prospective ministerial servants and elders ? 
 In imitation of Jesus and Paul , experienced shepherds take the initiative to train baptized brothers , with similar good results . 
 Consider Chad’s experience . 
 He was brought up in a religiously divided household but was recently appointed as an elder . 
 He says : “ Over the years , several experienced elders helped me to progress spiritually . 
 Because my father was an unbeliever , those elders showed a particular interest in me and became like spiritual fathers to me . 
 They took the time to train me in the ministry , and later , one elder in particular trained me in caring for the congregational assignments I received . ” 
 As Chad’s experience shows , discerning shepherds start training prospective ministerial servants and elders long before these have progressed enough to qualify for such privileges . 
 Why so ? 
 Because the Bible commands that both ministerial servants and elders attain a high moral and spiritual standard before they are appointed to serve . 
 They must be “ tested as to fitness first . ” ​ — 1 Timothy 3 : 1 - 10 . 
 What responsibility do mature shepherds have , and why ? 
 If baptized brothers are to be tested , it is only fair that they are first trained . 
 To illustrate : If a student at school was asked to take a difficult examination for which the teachers had provided no specific training , would the student pass the test ? 
 Most likely , he would fail . 
 Therefore , training is needed . 
 However , conscientious teachers train students not only to pass a test but also to use the knowledge they gain . 
 Similarly , diligent elders help baptized brothers to cultivate the qualities required of an appointed man by providing them with specific training . 
 They do so not merely to help these brothers to be appointed to serve but also to help them to be able to care adequately for the flock . 
 Of course , baptized brothers must do their part and work hard to meet the qualifications required of a ministerial servant or an elder . 
 Nevertheless , by willingly training those who are reaching out for responsibility in the congregation , experienced shepherds can help them progress more quickly . 
 10 , 11 . 
 How can shepherds train others for further privileges ? 
 How , specifically , can experienced shepherds train others to care for congregational privileges ? 
 To begin with , by taking an interest in the brothers in the congregation ​ — regularly working with them in the field ministry and helping them improve their ability to handle “ the word of the truth aright . ” 
 Mature shepherds discuss with those brothers the joys to be derived from serving others and the satisfaction they themselves receive from setting and attaining spiritual goals . 
 They also kindly offer specific suggestions on how a brother can improve in becoming an ‘ example to the flock . ’ ​ — 1 Peter 5 : 3 , 5 . 
 Once a brother is appointed as a ministerial servant , wise shepherds continue training him . 
 Bruce , who has served as an elder for decades , says : “ I like to sit down with a newly appointed servant and review with him the instructions published by the faithful and discreet slave . 
 We also read any guidelines regarding his specific assignment , and then I like to work with him until he is familiar with his duties . ” 
 As a servant gains experience , he can also be trained in the shepherding work . 
 “ When I take a ministerial servant with me on a shepherding call , ” Bruce continues , “ I help him to choose specific scriptures that will encourage and motivate the individual or the family we are to visit . 
 Learning how to use the Scriptures in such a way that they touch the heart is essential if a servant is to become an effective shepherd . ” ​ — Hebrews 4 : 12 ; 5 : 14 . 
 How can experienced shepherds train newly appointed elders ? 
 Newly appointed shepherds also benefit greatly from further training . 
 Nick , mentioned earlier , says : “ The training I received from two older overseers in particular was very helpful . 
 These brothers usually understood how certain matters should be handled . 
 They always patiently listened to me and seriously considered my viewpoint ​ — even if they did not agree with it . 
 I learned a lot from observing the humble and respectful way they dealt with the brothers and sisters in the congregation . 
 These elders impressed upon me the need to use the Bible skillfully when handling problems or when giving encouragement . ” 
 Trained by God’s Word 
 ( a ) What does a brother need in order to be an effective shepherd ? 
 ( b ) Why did Jesus say : “ What I teach is not mine ” ? 
 Indeed , God’s Word , the Bible , contains the laws , principles , and examples a shepherd needs in order to become “ fully competent , completely equipped for every good work . ” 
 A brother may have a good secular education , but it is his knowledge of the Scriptures and how he applies it that help make him an effective shepherd . 
 Consider Jesus ’ example . 
 He was the most knowledgeable , the most discerning , and the wisest spiritual shepherd ever to walk the earth ; yet , even he did not rely on his own wisdom when teaching Jehovah’s sheep . 
 He said : “ What I teach is not mine , but belongs to him that sent me . ” 
 Why did Jesus give credit to his heavenly Father ? 
 He explained : “ He that speaks of his own originality is seeking his own glory . ” ​ — John 7 : 16 , 18 . 
 How do shepherds avoid seeking their own glory ? 
 Loyal shepherds avoid seeking their own glory . 
 They base their counsel and encouragement , not on their own wisdom , but on God’s Word . 
 They appreciate that a shepherd’s assignment is to help the sheep gain “ the mind of Christ , ” not the mind of the elders . 
 For example , what if an elder who was helping a couple deal with marital difficulties based his counsel on his own experience rather than on Bible principles and information published by “ the faithful and discreet slave ” ? 
 His advice might be overly influenced by local customs and restricted by his limited knowledge . 
 Granted , some customs are not bad in themselves , and the elder may have experience in life . 
 But the sheep benefit most when shepherds encourage them to listen to Jesus ’ voice and to the sayings of Jehovah rather than to men’s thoughts or to the dictates of local custom . ​ — Psalm 12 : 6 ; Proverbs 3 : 5 , 6 . 
 Trained by “ the Faithful and Discreet Slave ” 
 What commission did Jesus give to “ the faithful and discreet slave , ” and what is one reason for the success of the slave class ? 
 Shepherds such as the apostles Peter , John , and Paul were all members of the group Jesus described as “ the faithful and discreet slave . ” 
 This slave class is composed of Jesus ’ spirit - anointed brothers on earth , whose hope is to rule with Christ in heaven . 
 During these last days of this system , the number of Christ’s brothers left on earth has inevitably declined . 
 However , the work Jesus commissioned them to accomplish ​ — the preaching of the good news of the Kingdom before the end comes — ​ is now more widely extended than ever . 
 Even so , the slave class has been remarkably successful ! 
 Why ? 
 In part , because they have trained members of the “ other sheep ” to assist them in the preaching and teaching work . 
 Today , the bulk of the work is accomplished by this loyal group . 
 How does the slave class train appointed men ? 
 How does the slave class provide this training ? 
 In the first century , representatives of the slave class were authorized to train and appoint overseers in the congregations , and they , in turn , trained the sheep . 
 The same is true today . 
 The Governing Body ​ — the small group of anointed elders who represent the slave class — ​ authorizes its representatives to train and appoint servants and elders in the tens of thousands of congregations worldwide . 
 In addition , the Governing Body organizes schools to train Branch Committee members , traveling overseers , elders , and ministerial servants in how best to care for the sheep . 
 Further direction is provided through letters , in articles published in The Watchtower , and by means of other publications , such as Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will . 
 * 
 ( a ) How has Jesus shown his confidence in the slave class ? 
 ( b ) How can spiritual shepherds show that they have confidence in the slave class ? 
 Jesus had so much confidence in the slave class that he appointed it over “ all his belongings ” ​ — that is , all his spiritual interests on the earth . 
 Appointed shepherds prove that they too have confidence in the slave class by applying the directions they receive from its Governing Body . 
 Yes , when shepherds train others , when they allow themselves to be trained by God’s Word , and when they apply the training provided by the slave class , they promote unity among the flock . 
 How grateful we are that Jehovah has trained men who deeply care for each member of the Christian congregation ! 
 [ Footnote ] 
 Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • How do mature spiritual shepherds train others ? 
 • Why do shepherds not teach on the basis of their own thoughts ? 
 • How and why do shepherds show confidence in the slave class ? 
 [ Pictures on page 24 , 25 ] 
 Christian elders train younger men in the congregation 
 [ Pictures on page 26 ] 
 “ The faithful and discreet slave ” provides abundant training for elders 
 Loyally Serving Christ the King 
 “ To him there were given rulership and dignity and kingdom , that the peoples , national groups and languages should all serve even him . ” ​ — DANIEL 7 : 14 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 How do we know that Christ did not assume full Kingdom power in 33 C.E . ? 
 WHAT ruler could give his life for his subjects yet live again to rule as king ? 
 What king could live on earth , building trust and loyalty in his subjects , and then rule from heaven ? 
 The only person who could do this ​ — and more — ​ is Jesus Christ . 
 At Pentecost 33 C.E . , after Christ’s death , resurrection , and ascension to heaven , God “ made him head over all things to the congregation . ” 
 Christ thus began to rule but in a limited sense . 
 His initial subjects were spirit - anointed Christians , who made up spiritual Israel , “ the Israel of God . ” ​ — Galatians 6 : 16 ; Colossians 1 : 13 . 
 Almost 30 years after that Pentecost in 33 C.E . , the apostle Paul confirmed that Christ had not yet taken full Kingdom power , but he was “ at the right hand of God , from then on awaiting until his enemies should be placed as a stool for his feet . ” 
 Then , near the end of the first century C.E . , the aged apostle John foresaw in a vision the Universal Sovereign , Jehovah , installing Christ Jesus as King of the newborn heavenly Kingdom . 
 From our vantage point in history , we can review the overwhelming evidence confirming that Christ began to rule as Messianic King in heaven in 1914 . 
 * 
 ( a ) The good news of the Kingdom has taken on what new aspect since 1914 ? 
 ( b ) What questions can we ask ourselves ? 
 Yes , since 1914 the good news of the Kingdom has taken on a thrilling new aspect . 
 Christ has actively been ruling as King of God’s heavenly Kingdom , although “ in the midst of [ his ] enemies . ” 
 Moreover , throughout the earth , his loyal subjects are responding eagerly to his authority by participating in a global Bible education program unequaled in mankind’s history . 
 Spirit - anointed Christians , “ sons of the kingdom , ” serve as “ ambassadors substituting for Christ . ” 
 They are loyally supported by a flourishing throng of Christ’s “ other sheep , ” who function as envoys of God’s Kingdom . 
 Even so , we need to analyze whether we as individuals truly recognize Christ’s authority . 
 Are we unflinchingly loyal to him ? 
 How can we show loyalty to a King who rules in heaven ? 
 Let us first discuss , though , what reasons we have for being loyal to Christ . 
 A King Who Inspires Loyalty 
 What did Jesus accomplish as King - Designate during his earthly ministry ? 
 Our loyalty to Christ is founded on appreciation for what he did as well as for his outstanding qualities . 
 While on earth , Jesus as King - Designate displayed on a small scale what he will do as reigning King on a global scale in God’s due time . 
 He fed the hungry . 
 He healed the sick , the blind , the disabled , the deaf , and the speechless . 
 He even brought some dead individuals back to life . 
 Additionally , having knowledge of Jesus ’ life on earth enables us to get to know his qualities as earth’s future Ruler ​ — most notably his self - sacrificing love . 
 In this connection , Napoléon Bonaparte reportedly said : “ Alexander , Caesar , Charlemagne , and myself founded empires , but upon what did we rest the creations of our genius ? 
 Upon force . 
 Jesus Christ alone founded his kingdom upon love , and at this day millions of men would die for him . ” 
 Why was Jesus ’ personality so appealing ? 
 Because Jesus was mild - tempered and lowly in heart , those who were weighed down with pressures and burdens were refreshed by his upbuilding teachings and kind personality . 
 Children were at ease with him . 
 Humble , discerning men eagerly became his disciples . 
 His considerate and respectful manner won him the loyalty of many God - fearing women , a number of whom contributed their time , effort , and material possessions to care for him as he performed his ministry . ​ — Luke 8 : 1 - 3 . 
 What tender emotions did Jesus reveal when Lazarus died ? 
 Christ revealed some of his most tender feelings when his dear friend Lazarus died . 
 He was so deeply moved by Mary and Martha’s anguish that he could not restrain a grief - stricken groan , and he “ gave way to tears . ” 
 He “ became troubled ” ​ — agitated by great heartache and sorrow — ​ even though he knew that he was shortly going to bring Lazarus back to life . 
 Then , moved by love and compassion , Jesus exercised his God - given authority and raised Lazarus from the dead . ​ — John 11 : 11 - 15 , 33 - 35 , 38 - 44 . 
 Why is Jesus worthy of our loyalty ? 
 ( See also box on page 31 . ) 
 We stand in awe of Jesus ’ strong love for what was right and his abhorrence of hypocrisy and wickedness . 
 Twice he took bold action to clear the temple of greedy merchants . 
 Furthermore , as a human on earth , he was exposed to all kinds of adversity , giving him firsthand insight into the pressures and problems that we face . 
 Jesus also knew what it was like to be the victim of hatred and injustice . 
 Ultimately , he courageously submitted to a brutal death to accomplish his Father’s will and give his subjects everlasting life . 
 Do such qualities of Christ not move you to continue serving him loyally ? 
 But what is required to be a subject of Christ the King ? 
 Qualifying to Be a Subject 
 What is required of subjects of Christ ? 
 Think of this comparison : Becoming a citizen of another country usually entails meeting certain basic qualifications . 
 Prospective citizens may be required to be of good character and to meet certain health standards . 
 Similarly , subjects of Christ need to maintain high standards of morality and good spiritual health . ​ — 1 Corinthians 6 : 9 - 11 ; Galatians 5 : 19 - 23 . 
 How can we show that we are loyal to Christ ? 
 Jesus Christ also rightly requires that his subjects are loyal to him and his Kingdom . 
 They show such loyalty by living in harmony with what he taught when he was on earth as King - Designate . 
 For instance , they put Kingdom interests and God’s will ahead of material concerns . 
 They also earnestly try to reflect a Christlike personality , even under the most trying circumstances . 
 Further , Christ’s subjects follow his example by taking the initiative to do good to others . ​ — Matthew 7 : 12 ; John 13 : 3 - 17 . 
 How can loyalty to Christ be displayed in ( a ) the family and ( b ) the congregation ? 
 Jesus ’ followers also show their loyalty to him by reflecting his qualities in the family . 
 For instance , husbands show loyalty to their heavenly King by the Christlike way they treat their wives and children . 
 Wives show loyalty to Christ by chaste conduct and by displaying “ the quiet and mild spirit . ” 
 Children are loyal to Christ when they follow his example of obedience . 
 As a youth , Jesus remained subject to his parents , even though they were imperfect . 
 Christ’s subjects loyally endeavor to imitate him by “ showing fellow feeling , having brotherly affection ” and by being “ tenderly compassionate . ” 
 They strive to be like Christ , “ humble in mind , not paying back injury for injury or reviling for reviling . ” ​ — 1 Peter 3 : 8 , 9 ; 1 Corinthians 11 : 1 . 
 Law - Abiding Subjects 
 To which laws do Christ’s subjects submit themselves ? 
 Just as prospective citizens of a country abide by the laws of their new land , Christ’s subjects submit themselves to “ the law of the Christ ” by harmonizing their lives with all that Jesus taught and commanded . 
 In particular , they loyally live by “ the kingly law ” of love . 
 What do these laws involve ? 
 12 , 13 . 
 How do we loyally submit to “ the law of the Christ ” ? 
 Christ’s subjects are not free of imperfections and failings . 
 Hence , they need to keep cultivating “ unhypocritical brotherly affection ” so as to “ love one another intensely from the heart . ” 
 “ If anyone has a cause for complaint against another , ” Christians loyally apply the law of the Christ by “ putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely . ” 
 Obeying this law helps them to keep overlooking imperfections and to find reasons to love one another . 
 Do you not appreciate being with those who in loyal submission to our loving King clothe themselves with love , the “ perfect bond of union ” ? ​ — Colossians 3 : 13 , 14 . 
 Furthermore , Jesus explained that the love he exemplified went beyond the love people commonly show for one another . 
 If we love only those who love us , we would not be doing any “ extraordinary thing . ” 
 In that case our love would be incomplete and defective . 
 Jesus urged us to imitate his Father’s love by having principled love even for enemies who hate and persecute us . 
 This love also moves subjects of the Kingdom to persevere loyally in their main work . 
 What is that ? 
 Loyalty Put to the Test 
 Why is the preaching work so important ? 
 Subjects of God’s Kingdom now have the crucial work of “ bearing thorough witness concerning the kingdom of God . ” 
 Doing so is vital because the Messianic Kingdom will vindicate Jehovah’s universal sovereignty . 
 When we preach the good news , hearers have the opportunity to become subjects of God’s Kingdom . 
 Further , the way people react to that message provides a touchstone , or standard , against which Christ the King can judge mankind . 
 Hence , a prime way in which we show our loyalty to Christ is by obeying his command to tell others about the Kingdom . ​ — Matthew 28 : 18 - 20 . 
 Why does the loyalty of Christians come under test ? 
 Of course , Satan resists the preaching work in any way he can , and human rulers do not acknowledge Christ’s God - given authority . 
 Hence , Jesus warned his disciples : “ A slave is not greater than his master . 
 If they have persecuted me , they will persecute you also . ” 
 Christ’s followers , therefore , find themselves in a spiritual warfare that puts their loyalty to the test . ​ — 2 Corinthians 10 : 3 - 5 ; Ephesians 6 : 10 - 12 . 
 How do subjects of the Kingdom pay back “ God’s things to God ” ? 
 Nevertheless , subjects of God’s Kingdom remain loyal to their invisible King without disrespecting human authorities . 
 Jesus stated : “ Pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar , but God’s things to God . ” 
 Christ’s subjects , therefore , obey governmental laws that do not conflict with God’s laws . 
 However , when the Jewish high court went against God’s laws by ordering Jesus ’ disciples to stop preaching , they firmly but respectfully said that they had to “ obey God as ruler rather than men . ” ​ — Acts 1 : 8 ; 5 : 27 - 32 . 
 Why can we face tests of loyalty with courage ? 
 Naturally , it takes much courage for Christ’s subjects to remain loyal to their King in the face of persecution . 
 Nevertheless , Jesus said : “ Happy are you when people reproach you and persecute you and lyingly say every sort of wicked thing against you for my sake . 
 Rejoice and leap for joy , since your reward is great in the heavens . ” 
 The early followers of Christ experienced the truthfulness of those words . 
 Even when they were flogged for continuing to preach about the Kingdom , they rejoiced “ because they had been counted worthy to be dishonored in behalf of his name . 
 And every day in the temple and from house to house they continued without letup teaching and declaring the good news about the Christ , Jesus . ” 
 You are to be commended , as you show the same spirit of loyalty when you endure hardships , sickness , bereavement , or opposition . ​ — Romans 5 : 3 - 5 ; Hebrews 13 : 6 . 
 What do Jesus ’ words to Pontius Pilate indicate ? 
 When he was still King - Designate , Jesus explained to the Roman Governor Pontius Pilate : “ My kingdom is no part of this world . 
 If my kingdom were part of this world , my attendants would have fought that I should not be delivered up to the Jews . 
 But , as it is , my kingdom is not from this source . ” 
 Subjects of the heavenly Kingdom , therefore , neither take up arms against anyone nor take sides in any human conflict . 
 In loyalty to the “ Prince of Peace , ” they remain completely neutral in the partisan affairs of the world . ​ — Isaiah 2 : 2 - 4 ; 9 : 6 , 7 . 
 Everlasting Rewards for Loyal Subjects 
 Why can Christ’s subjects look to the future with confidence ? 
 Loyal subjects of Christ , the “ King of kings , ” face the future with confidence . 
 They eagerly anticipate his imminent demonstration of supernatural kingly power . 
 The remnant of loyal , spirit - anointed “ sons of the kingdom ” look forward to their priceless inheritance as kings with Christ in heaven . 
 Christ’s loyal “ other sheep ” keenly await their King’s approving declaration : “ Come , you who have been blessed by my Father , inherit the [ earthly Paradise realm of the ] kingdom prepared for you from the founding of the world . ” 
 Accordingly , may all subjects of the Kingdom be determined to continue loyally serving Christ the King . 
 [ Footnote ] 
 See Reasoning From the Scriptures , “ Why do Jehovah’s Witnesses say that God’s Kingdom was established in 1914 ? ” 
 pages 95 - 7 , published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 Can You Explain ? 
 • Why does Christ deserve our loyalty ? 
 • How do Christ’s subjects show their loyalty to him ? 
 • Why do we want to be loyal to Christ the King ? 
 [ Box on page 31 ] 
 MORE OF CHRIST’S OUTSTANDING QUALITIES 
 Impartiality ​ — John 4 : 7 - 30 . 
 Compassion ​ — Matthew 9 : 35 - 38 ; 12 : 18 - 21 ; Mark 6 : 30 - 34 . 
 Self - sacrificing love ​ — John 13 : 1 ; 15 : 12 - 15 . 
 Loyalty ​ — Matthew 4 : 1 - 11 ; 28 : 20 ; Mark 11 : 15 - 18 . 
 Empathy ​ — Mark 7 : 32 - 35 ; Luke 7 : 11 - 15 ; Hebrews 4 : 15 , 16 . 
 Reasonableness ​ — Matthew 15 : 21 - 28 . 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 By showing love for one another , we loyally submit to “ the law of the Christ ” 
 [ Pictures on page 31 ] 
 Do Christ’s qualities move you to serve him loyally ? 
 Are You Prepared for Survival ? 
 “ Go , you and all your household , into the ark , because you are the one I have seen to be righteous before me among this generation . ” ​ — GENESIS 7 : 1 . 
 What provision for survival did Jehovah make in the days of Noah ? 
 JEHOVAH “ brought a deluge upon a world of ungodly people ” in the days of Noah , but He also made provision for survival . 
 The true God gave righteous Noah explicit instructions on how to build an ark for the preservation of life through a global flood . 
 As we would expect of a conscientious servant of Jehovah , “ Noah proceeded to do according to all that God had commanded him . ” 
 Indeed , “ he did just so . ” 
 Partly because of Noah’s obedience , we are alive today . ​ — Genesis 6 : 22 . 
 2 , 3 . ( a ) How did Noah’s contemporaries react to Noah’s activity ? 
 ( b ) With what confidence did Noah enter the ark ? 
 Building the ark was no small task . 
 Very likely , many people were amazed at what Noah and his family were accomplishing . 
 Yet , that was not enough to convince them that salvation depended upon their entering the ark . 
 Finally , God’s patience with that wicked world ran out . ​ — Genesis 6 : 3 ; 1 Peter 3 : 20 . 
 After decades of strenuous work on the part of Noah and his family , Jehovah told Noah : “ Go , you and all your household , into the ark , because you are the one I have seen to be righteous before me among this generation . ” 
 With faith and confidence in Jehovah’s word , “ Noah went in , and his sons and his wife and his sons ’ wives with him . ” 
 Jehovah shut the door in order to protect his worshippers . 
 When the Deluge came upon the earth , the ark proved to be God’s dependable provision for survival . ​ — Genesis 7 : 1 , 7 , 10 , 16 . 
 Modern Parallels to Noah’s Day 
 4 , 5 . ( a ) To what did Jesus compare the time of his presence ? 
 ( b ) What parallels exist between Noah’s day and our time ? 
 “ Just as the days of Noah were , so the presence of the Son of man will be . ” 
 With these words , Jesus indicated that the time of his invisible presence would be similar to the days of Noah , and that has truly been so . 
 Particularly since 1919 , a warning message similar to the one given by Noah has been declared to people of all nations . 
 In general , their reaction has been similar to that of people in Noah’s days . 
 By means of the Flood , Jehovah took action against a world “ full of violence . ” 
 That Noah and his family refrained from taking part in such violence and instead peacefully went about the work of building an ark was obvious to all who saw them . 
 Here , too , we see a parallel to our day . 
 Sincere people can now “ see the distinction between a righteous one and a wicked one , between one serving God and one who has not served him . ” 
 The honesty , kindness , peacefulness , and diligence displayed by Jehovah’s Witnesses are admired by unprejudiced onlookers , and these qualities distinguish God’s people from the world in general . 
 The Witnesses reject violence in all its forms and let themselves be motivated by Jehovah’s spirit . 
 That is why they are blessed with peace and why they pursue a righteous course . ​ — Isaiah 60 : 17 . 
 6 , 7 . ( a ) What did people in Noah’s day fail to appreciate , and how is it similar today ? 
 ( b ) What examples show that Jehovah’s Witnesses are generally recognized as being different ? 
 Noah’s contemporaries failed to appreciate that Noah had divine backing and was acting at God’s direction . 
 So they did not take his preaching seriously and act on his warning message . 
 What about today ? 
 Although many are impressed by the work and conduct of Jehovah’s Witnesses , most do not take the good news and the Bible’s warnings seriously . 
 Neighbors , employers , or relatives may speak highly of the fine qualities of true Christians but then lament , “ If only they were not Jehovah’s Witnesses ! ” 
 What these observers overlook is that the Witnesses manifest such qualities as love , peace , kindness , goodness , mildness , and self - control because they are led by God’s holy spirit . 
 This should add credibility to their message . 
 In Russia , for instance , Jehovah’s Witnesses were building a Kingdom Hall . 
 A man who stopped to talk to one of the workers remarked : “ What a strange construction site ​ — no smoking , no rough speech , and everyone is sober ! 
 Are you by any chance one of Jehovah’s Witnesses ? ” 
 The worker asked him , “ If I said no , would you believe me ? ” 
 The man quickly replied , “ Not really . ” 
 In another Russian city , the mayor was greatly impressed when he saw the Witnesses build their new Kingdom Hall . 
 He said that although he had once viewed all religious groups as being the same , after seeing the sincere unselfishness of Jehovah’s Witnesses in action , he no longer did so . 
 These are just two examples showing that Jehovah’s people differ from those who do not adhere to Bible standards . 
 Our surviving the end of this wicked world depends on what ? 
 During the final period of the “ ancient world ” that perished in the Flood , Noah was a faithful “ preacher of righteousness . ” 
 In these last days of the present system of things , Jehovah’s people are making known God’s righteous standards and are declaring good news about the possibility of surviving into the new world . 
 Just as Noah and his God - fearing family were preserved in the ark , survival of individuals today depends on their faith and their loyal association with the earthly part of Jehovah’s universal organization . 
 Faith Required for Survival 
 9 , 10 . 
 Why is faith essential if we are to survive the end of Satan’s system of things ? 
 What must a person do in order to survive the imminent destruction of this world that is lying in Satan’s power ? 
 He must first recognize the need for protection . 
 Then he must avail himself of such protection . 
 The people of Noah’s day went about their daily life in their usual way and saw no need for protection from impending calamity . 
 They lacked something else ​ — faith in God . 
 On the other hand , Noah and his family recognized their need for protection and deliverance . 
 They also exercised faith in the Universal Sovereign , Jehovah God . 
 “ Without faith it is impossible to please [ Jehovah ] well , ” wrote the apostle Paul , “ for he that approaches God must believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him . ” 
 Paul added : “ By faith Noah , after being given divine warning of things not yet beheld , showed godly fear and constructed an ark for the saving of his household ; and through this faith he condemned the world , and he became an heir of the righteousness that is according to faith . ” ​ — Hebrews 11 : 6 , 7 . 
 What can we learn from how Jehovah provided protection in times past ? 
 To survive the end of the present wicked system of things , we must do more than believe that it will be destroyed . 
 We must exercise faith , taking full advantage of God’s provisions for survival . 
 Of course , we need to exercise faith in the ransom sacrifice of God’s Son , Jesus Christ . 
 However , we do well to remember that only those actually inside Noah’s ark survived the Flood . 
 Similarly , the cities of refuge in ancient Israel provided protection for the unintentional manslayer only if he first fled to such a city and then remained inside it until the death of the high priest . 
 In the tenth plague upon Egypt in Moses ’ day , the firstborn of the Egyptians were killed , but those of the Israelites were spared . 
 Why ? 
 Jehovah had instructed Moses : “ They [ the Israelites ] must take some of the blood [ of the Passover lamb ] and splash it upon the two doorposts and the upper part of the doorway belonging to the houses in which they will eat it . . . . 
 And none of you should go out of the entrance of his house until morning . ” 
 Which firstborn among the Israelites would have dared to ignore such God - given instructions by going outside a house marked with the blood splashed on the two doorposts and the upper part of the doorway ? 
 What question should each of us ask himself , and why ? 
 We therefore have reason to think carefully about our personal situation . 
 Are we actually inside Jehovah’s arrangement of spiritual protection ? 
 When the great tribulation strikes , tears of joy and thankfulness will stream down the faces of those who have sought such protection . 
 For others , there will be only tears of sorrow and regret . 
 Progressive Adjustments Prepare Us 
 ( a ) What purpose have organizational adjustments served ? 
 ( b ) Explain some of the progressive refinements . 
 Jehovah has brought about progressive adjustments in the earthly part of his organization . 
 These have served to beautify , stabilize , and strengthen his arrangement for our spiritual protection . 
 From the 1870 ’ s to 1932 , elders and deacons were voted into office by members of the congregation . 
 In 1932 the elective elders were replaced with a service committee elected by the congregation to assist an appointed service director . 
 During 1938 , arrangements were made for the theocratic appointment of all servants in the congregation . 
 Under the direction of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses , since 1972 , recommendations are made and if these are approved , the congregations receive letters theocratically appointing overseers and ministerial servants . 
 Over the years , the role played by the Governing Body has intensified and changes have been made to facilitate its work . 
 What training program began in 1959 ? 
 Back in 1950 , careful consideration of Psalm 45 : 16 gave rise to an ongoing training program . 
 That text reads : “ In place of your forefathers there will come to be your sons , whom you will appoint as princes in all the earth . ” 
 Elders now taking the lead in the congregation are being trained for present and post - Armageddon theocratic duties . 
 The Kingdom Ministry School was started in 1959 . 
 At that time , a month - long course of instruction was provided primarily for congregation servants , as presiding overseers were then called . 
 This school has now been extended to offer instruction to all overseers and ministerial servants . 
 These brothers , in turn , take the lead in training individual Witnesses of Jehovah in their respective congregations . 
 Thus , all are assisted spiritually and are helped to increase the effectiveness of their ministry as proclaimers of the good news of the Kingdom . ​ — Mark 13 : 10 . 
 What are two ways in which the purity of the Christian congregation is preserved ? 
 Individuals wanting to become part of the Christian congregation must meet certain requirements . 
 Logically , modern - day ridiculers are kept out , even as such ones found no place in Noah’s ark . 
 Particularly since 1952 , Jehovah’s Witnesses have given increased support to an arrangement that helps to protect the congregation ​ — that is , the disfellowshipping of unrepentant sinners . 
 Of course , truly repentant wrongdoers are lovingly helped to ‘ make straight paths for their feet . ’ ​ — Hebrews 12 : 12 , 13 ; Proverbs 28 : 13 ; Galatians 6 : 1 . 
 What is the spiritual condition of Jehovah’s people ? 
 The spiritually prosperous condition of Jehovah’s people is neither a surprise nor an accident . 
 Through the prophet Isaiah , Jehovah said : “ Look ! 
 My own servants will eat , but you yourselves will go hungry . 
 Look ! 
 My own servants will drink , but you yourselves will go thirsty . 
 Look ! 
 My own servants will rejoice , but you yourselves will suffer shame . 
 Look ! 
 My own servants will cry out joyfully because of the good condition of the heart , but you yourselves will make outcries because of the pain of heart and you will howl because of sheer breakdown of spirit . ” 
 Jehovah continues to provide us with an abundant supply of timely and healthful spiritual food that keeps us spiritually strong . ​ — Matthew 24 : 45 . 
 Be Prepared for Survival 
 What will help us to prepare for survival ? 
 As never before , now is the time to “ consider one another to incite to love and fine works , not forsaking the gathering of ourselves together , as some have the custom , but encouraging one another . ” 
 Sticking close to and staying active with one of the over 98,000 congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses will help us to prepare ourselves for survival . 
 We will have the support of fellow believers as we strive to manifest “ the new personality ” and put forth wholehearted efforts to help others learn of Jehovah’s provision for salvation . ​ — Ephesians 4 : 22 - 24 ; Colossians 3 : 9 , 10 ; 1 Timothy 4 : 16 . 
 Why are you determined to stay close to the Christian congregation ? 
 Satan and his evil world are keenly desirous of luring us away from the Christian congregation . 
 However , we can remain a part of it and can survive the end of the present wicked system of things . 
 May love for Jehovah and gratitude for his loving provisions move us to be more determined than ever to thwart Satan’s efforts . 
 Meditating on our present - day blessings will strengthen our resolve . 
 Some of these blessings will be discussed in the next article . 
 What Are Your Answers ? 
 • How do our times parallel Noah’s day ? 
 • What quality is essential for survival ? 
 • What progressive adjustments have strengthened Jehovah’s arrangement for our protection ? 
 • How can we personally prepare for survival ? 
 [ Picture on page 22 ] 
 Noah’s contemporaries did not take Noah seriously 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 It pays to take God’s warning messages seriously 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 What purpose does the Kingdom Ministry School serve ? 
 [ Picture on page 25 ] 
 Now is the time to stay close to the Christian congregation 
 The Joys of Walking in Integrity 
 “ The blessing of Jehovah ​ — that is what makes rich , and he adds no pain with it . ” ​ — PROVERBS 10 : 22 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 Why should we guard against being overly preoccupied with the future ? 
 “ A PREOCCUPATION with the future . . . prevents us from seeing the present as it is , ” noted one American philosopher . 
 This is true of children who are so preoccupied with the privileges of adulthood that they overlook the benefits of childhood until it is long gone . 
 Even Jehovah’s worshippers are not immune to this pattern of thinking . 
 Consider what can happen . 
 We long for the fulfillment of God’s promise to bring about a paradise on earth . 
 We eagerly await a life free of sickness , old age , pain , and suffering . 
 While it is good to be in expectation of such things , what if we become so preoccupied with future physical blessings that we are blind to our present - day spiritual blessings ? 
 What a shame that would be ! 
 We could easily become discouraged and feel ‘ sick at heart because our expectations have been postponed ’ beyond what we imagined . 
 Problems and difficulties in life might throw us into the trap of despondency or self - pity . 
 Instead of coping with bad situations , we could develop a complaining attitude . 
 All of this can be avoided by appreciatively meditating on our present blessings . 
 On what will we focus our attention in this article ? 
 “ The blessing of Jehovah ​ — that is what makes rich , and he adds no pain with it , ” states Proverbs 10 : 22 . 
 Is not the spiritually prosperous condition of the modern - day servants of Jehovah a blessing to rejoice over ? 
 Let us consider some aspects of our spiritual prosperity and see what they mean to us personally . 
 Taking time to reflect on the favors that Jehovah has showered upon ‘ the righteous one walking in his integrity ’ will indeed strengthen our resolve to continue serving our heavenly Father joyfully . ​ — Proverbs 20 : 7 . 
 ‘ Blessings That Make Us Rich ’ Now 
 4 , 5 . 
 Which Bible teaching do you especially appreciate , and why ? 
 An accurate knowledge of Bible teachings . 
 The religions of Christendom generally claim to believe the Bible . 
 However , they fail to agree on what it teaches . 
 Even members of the same religious group often differ in their views of what the Scriptures really teach . 
 How different their condition is from that of Jehovah’s servants ! 
 Regardless of our national , cultural , or ethnic background , we worship the God we know by name . 
 He is not some mysterious triune god . 
 We are also aware that the paramount issue of God’s universal sovereignty is due for settlement and that by maintaining our integrity to him , each one of us is personally involved in that issue . 
 We know the truth about the dead and are free of the morbid fear of a God who is said to torment humans in hellfire or consign them to purgatory . ​ — Ecclesiastes 9 : 5 , 10 . 
 Moreover , what a joy it is to know that we are not an accidental product of blind evolution ! 
 Rather , we are God’s creation , made in his own image . 
 “ I shall laud you because in a fear - inspiring way I am wonderfully made , ” sang the psalmist to his God . 
 “ Your works are wonderful , as my soul is very well aware . ” ​ — Psalm 139 : 14 . 
 6 , 7 . 
 What changes in your life or in the life of others you know have proved to be a blessing ? 
 Release from detrimental habits and practices . 
 Warnings about the dangers of smoking , excessive drinking , and sexual promiscuity abound in the media . 
 For the most part , these warnings go unheeded . 
 What happens , though , when a sincere person learns that the true God condemns such things and is saddened by those who practice them ? 
 Why , that person is moved to exclude such practices from his life ! 
 While he does this primarily to please Jehovah God , he also receives additional benefits ​ — better health and peace of mind . 
 Breaking bad habits is very difficult for many . 
 Still , each year tens of thousands are doing so . 
 They dedicate themselves to Jehovah and submit to water baptism , thus making it public that they have eliminated from their lives the practices that displease God . 
 What an encouragement that is to all of us ! 
 Our determination to remain free from enslavement to sinful and hurtful conduct is reinforced . 
 What Bible - based counsel contributes to family happiness ? 
 Happy family life . 
 In numerous countries family life is faltering . 
 Many marriages end in divorce , often leaving behind painfully scarred children . 
 In some European countries , one - parent families make up close to 20 percent of all households . 
 How has Jehovah helped us walk in the way of integrity in this regard ? 
 Please read Ephesians 5 : 22 – 6 : 4 , and note the fine counsel that God’s Word gives to husbands , wives , and children . 
 Applying what is stated there and elsewhere in the Scriptures certainly strengthens the marriage bond , helps parents to bring up children properly , and contributes to a happy family life . 
 Is that not a blessing to rejoice over ? 
 9 , 10 . 
 How does our outlook for the future differ from that of the world ? 
 Assurance that world problems will soon be solved . 
 Despite scientific and technological know - how and the sincere efforts of certain leaders , serious problems of present - day life remain unsolved . 
 Klaus Schwab , founder of the World Economic Forum , recently noted that “ the list of challenges facing the world grows ever longer and the time to address them grows shorter . ” 
 He spoke of “ dangers that transcend national boundaries like terrorism , environmental degradation and financial instability . ” 
 Schwab concluded : “ Now , more than ever , the world is faced with realities that call for collective and decisive action . ” 
 As the 21st century moves forward , the overall outlook for mankind’s future remains bleak . 
 How gratifying to know that Jehovah has instituted an arrangement that is capable of solving all of mankind’s problems ​ — the Messianic Kingdom of God ! 
 By means of it , the true God will ‘ make wars to cease ’ and bring about ‘ abundant peace . ’ 
 The anointed King , Jesus Christ , ‘ will deliver the poor one , the afflicted one , and the lowly one from oppression and from violence . ’ 
 Under Kingdom rule , there will be no food shortage . 
 Jehovah “ will wipe out every tear from [ our ] eyes , and death will be no more , neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore . 
 The former things have passed away . ” 
 The Kingdom has already been established in heaven and will shortly take the necessary action to affect every affair on the earth . ​ — Daniel 2 : 44 ; Revelation 11 : 15 . 
 11 , 12 . ( a ) Does pursuit of pleasure bring lasting happiness ? 
 Explain . ( b ) What brings true happiness ? 
 Knowing what brings true happiness . 
 What does bring true happiness ? 
 One psychologist said that happiness has three components ​ — pleasure , engagement ( involvement in such activities as work and family ) , and meaning ( working toward a larger end or goal than self ) . 
 Of the three , he listed pleasure as the least consequential and observed : “ This is newsworthy because so many people build their lives around pursuing pleasure . ” 
 What is the Bible’s view in this regard ? 
 King Solomon of ancient Israel stated : “ I said , even I , in my heart : ‘ Do come now , let me try you out with rejoicing . 
 Also , see good . ’ 
 And , look ! 
 that too was vanity . 
 I said to laughter : ‘ Insanity ! ’ 
 and to rejoicing : ‘ What is this doing ? ’ ” 
 Scripturally , whatever happiness pleasure offers is at best temporary . 
 What about involvement in work ? 
 We have the most meaningful work to get involved in ​ — the Kingdom - preaching and disciple - making work . 
 By sharing with others the message of salvation outlined in the Bible , we engage in a work that can result in our own salvation and in that of those who listen to us . 
 As “ God’s fellow workers , ” we experience that “ there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving . ” 
 This work adds meaning to our life and provides the Creator with an answer for his taunter , Satan the Devil . 
 Indeed , Jehovah has shown us that godly devotion brings genuine and lasting happiness . ​ — 1 Timothy 4 : 8 . 
 ( a ) In what way is the Theocratic Ministry School a blessing for us to rejoice over ? 
 ( b ) How have you benefited from the Theocratic Ministry School ? 
 An important and effective training program . 
 Gerhard serves as an elder in a congregation of Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 Recalling his youth , he says : “ As a young person , I had great problems speaking . 
 When under pressure , I could scarcely articulate and would begin to stutter . 
 I felt inferior and developed a complex . 
 My parents arranged for me to take a speaking course , but their efforts were to no avail . 
 My problem was psychological , not physical . 
 There was , though , a wonderful provision from Jehovah ​ — the Theocratic Ministry School . 
 Enrolling in this school gave me renewed courage . 
 I tried my best to practice what I learned . 
 And it worked ! 
 I became freer , lost my complex , and became more courageous in the ministry . 
 Now I even deliver public talks . 
 I am truly grateful to Jehovah , who gave me a new life through this school . ” 
 Is not the way Jehovah trains us to do his work a reason to be joyful ? 
 14 , 15 . 
 In times of distress , what help is readily available ? 
 Illustrate . 
 A personal relationship with Jehovah and support from the united international brotherhood . 
 Katrin , who lives in Germany , was greatly dismayed upon hearing reports of a severe earthquake and resultant tsunami in southeast Asia . 
 Her daughter was visiting Thailand when the catastrophe hit . 
 For 32 hours this mother did not know whether her daughter was alive or was among the casualties that mounted hour by hour . 
 How relieved Katrin was finally to receive a telephone call that assured her of her daughter’s safety ! 
 What helped Katrin during those hours of anxiety ? 
 She writes : “ I spent almost all of this time in prayer to Jehovah . 
 I noticed over and over again how much strength and peace of mind this gave me . 
 Moreover , loving spiritual brothers visited me and stood by my side . ” 
 How much worse her situation would have been if she had had to spend those agonizing hours without the benefit of prayer to Jehovah and the comfort of a loving spiritual brotherhood ! 
 Our intimate relationship with Jehovah and his Son along with our close association with the Christian brotherhood is a unique blessing , too precious to be taken for granted . 
 Give an experience that illustrates the value of the resurrection hope . 
 The hope of seeing dead loved ones again . 
 A young man named Matthias was raised as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 Unaware of his blessings , however , he drifted away from the Christian congregation when he was a teenager . 
 He now writes : “ I never really had deep discussions with my father . 
 Over the years , we had many arguments . 
 Still , my father always wanted the best for me . 
 He loved me dearly , something I failed to realize at the time . 
 In 1996 , as I sat at his bedside , holding his hand and crying bitterly , I told him how sorry I was for all that I had done and that I loved him so much . 
 But he could not hear me . 
 After a short illness , he slipped away in death . 
 If I live to see my father in the resurrection , we will make up for the past . 
 And he will surely be happy to hear that I now serve as an elder and that my wife and I are privileged to serve as pioneers . ” 
 What a blessing the resurrection hope is to us ! 
 “ He Adds No Pain With It ” 
 What should meditating on Jehovah’s blessings do for us ? 
 Concerning his heavenly Father , Jesus Christ said : “ He makes his sun rise upon wicked people and good and makes it rain upon righteous people and unrighteous . ” 
 If Jehovah God bestows blessings upon even the unrighteous and the wicked , how much more so upon those who walk in the way of integrity ! 
 “ Jehovah himself will not hold back anything good from those walking in faultlessness , ” states Psalm 84 : 11 . 
 When we meditate on the special care and concern he has shown for those who love him , how our hearts swell with gratitude and joy ! 
 ( a ) How can it be said that Jehovah adds no pain with his blessing ? 
 ( b ) Why do many of God’s loyal ones suffer ? 
 “ The blessing of Jehovah ” ​ — that is what has given spiritual prosperity to his people . 
 And we are assured that “ he adds no pain with it . ” 
 Why , then , do tests and trials befall many of God’s loyal ones , causing them much pain and suffering ? 
 Difficulties and distress come our way for three main reasons . 
 ( 1 ) Our own sinful inclination . 
 ( 2 ) Satan and his demons . 
 ( 3 ) The wicked world . 
 While Jehovah permits bad things to happen to us , he is not the originator of them . 
 In fact , “ every good gift and every perfect present is from above , for it comes down from the Father of the celestial lights . ” 
 Jehovah’s blessings are without pain . 
 What awaits those who continue to walk in integrity ? 
 Experiencing spiritual prosperity always involves drawing close to God . 
 When we develop an intimate relationship with him , we ‘ safely treasure up for ourselves a fine foundation for the future , in order that we may get a firm hold on the real life ’ ​ — everlasting life . 
 In the future new world of God’s making , our spiritual riches will be coupled with physical blessings . 
 The real life will then be the lot of all those who “ keep listening to the voice of Jehovah . ” 
 With strengthened determination , let us joyfully continue walking in integrity . 
 What Did You Learn ? 
 • Why is it unwise to be overly preoccupied with the future ? 
 • What blessings do we enjoy now ? 
 • Why do God’s faithful servants suffer ? 
 Jehovah Tells “ From the Beginning the Finale ” 
 “ The One telling from the beginning the finale , and from long ago the things that have not been done . ” ​ — ISAIAH 46 : 10 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What is remarkable about the events associated with Babylon’s overthrow , and what does this fact indicate about Jehovah ? 
 IN THE dead of night , enemy soldiers advance stealthily along the bed of the Euphrates River toward their objective , the mighty city of Babylon . 
 As they approach the entrance to the city , an astonishing sight greets their eyes . 
 The colossal two - leaved doors in Babylon’s wall have been left open ! 
 Out of the riverbed , they climb ; into the city , they enter . 
 Swiftly the city falls . 
 Cyrus , their leader , promptly takes charge of the conquered land and later issues a decree releasing the Israelite captives . 
 Thousands of exiles return home to restore the worship of Jehovah in Jerusalem . ​ — 2 Chronicles 36 : 22 , 23 ; Ezra 1 : 1 - 4 . 
 Those events of the years 539 - 537 B.C.E . are now well attested to by historians . 
 What is remarkable is that the events were known some 200 years ahead of time . 
 Jehovah inspired his prophet Isaiah to describe Babylon’s fall that far in advance . 
 God revealed not only the circumstances surrounding Babylon’s overthrow but also the name of the conquering leader . 
 * Addressing the Israelites , who were his witnesses back then , Jehovah said : “ Remember the first things of a long time ago , that I am the Divine One and there is no other God , nor anyone like me ; the One telling from the beginning the finale , and from long ago the things that have not been done . ” 
 Jehovah is truly a God who can know ahead of time what will happen . 
 Answers to what questions will now be considered ? 
 How much of the future does God know ? 
 Does Jehovah know in advance what each of us will do ? 
 Indeed , is our future predestined ? 
 We will consider the Bible’s answers to these and related questions in this and the following article . 
 Jehovah ​ — A God of Prophecy 
 Who is the Source of the prophecies recorded in the Bible ? 
 Being able to foreknow the future , Jehovah inspired his servants in Bible times to record many prophecies , which allow us to know in advance what Jehovah has purposed to do . 
 “ The first things ​ — here they have come , but new things I am telling out , ” Jehovah declares . 
 “ Before they begin to spring up , I cause you people to hear them . ” 
 How privileged God’s people are ! 
 What responsibility comes with advance knowledge of what Jehovah will do ? 
 The prophet Amos assures us : “ The Sovereign Lord Jehovah will not do a thing unless he has revealed his confidential matter to his servants the prophets . ” 
 This advance knowledge brought with it responsibility . 
 Notice the powerful illustration that Amos next uses : “ There is a lion that has roared ! 
 Who will not be afraid ? ” 
 Just as a lion’s roar provokes an immediate reaction from both man and beast in the vicinity , so such prophets as Amos promptly gave voice to Jehovah’s declarations . 
 “ The Sovereign Lord Jehovah himself has spoken ! 
 Who will not prophesy ? ” ​ — Amos 3 : 7 , 8 . 
 Jehovah’s “ Word ” Has “ Certain Success ” 
 In what way did Jehovah’s “ counsel ” prevail in connection with Babylon’s downfall ? 
 Through his prophet Isaiah , Jehovah said : “ My own counsel will stand , and everything that is my delight I shall do . ” 
 God’s “ counsel , ” that is , his will or purpose as far as Babylon was concerned , involved calling Cyrus out of Persia to conquer Babylon and bring about its downfall . 
 Jehovah declared that purpose long in advance . 
 As already noted , it unfailingly came to pass in the year 539 B.C.E . 
 Why can we be confident that Jehovah’s “ word ” always succeeds ? 
 Nearly four centuries before Cyrus ’ conquest of Babylon , King Jehoshaphat of Judah faced the combined armies of Ammon and Moab . 
 He confidently prayed : “ O Jehovah the God of our forefathers , are you not God in the heavens , and are you not dominating over all the kingdoms of the nations , and are there not in your hand power and mightiness , with no one to hold his ground against you ? ” 
 Isaiah expressed similar confidence when he stated : “ Jehovah of armies himself has counseled , and who can break it up ? 
 And his hand is the one stretched out , and who can turn it back ? ” 
 Later , when restored to his senses following a period of insanity , King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon humbly acknowledged : “ There exists no one that can check [ God’s ] hand or that can say to him , ‘ What have you been doing ? ’ ” 
 Yes , Jehovah assures his people : “ My word . . . will not return to me without results , but it will certainly do that in which I have delighted , and it will have certain success in that for which I have sent it . ” 
 We can have full confidence that Jehovah’s “ word ” always comes true . 
 God’s purpose is infallible . 
 God’s “ Eternal Purpose ” 
 What is God’s “ eternal purpose ” ? 
 In his letter to the Ephesian Christians , the apostle Paul referred to God as having an “ eternal purpose . ” 
 This is not simply a plan of action , as though God had to map out the way he would work . 
 Rather , it relates to Jehovah’s determination to accomplish what he originally intended for mankind and the earth . 
 To help us appreciate the infallibility of his purpose , consider the first prophecy recorded in the Bible . 
 How does Genesis 3 : 15 relate to God’s purpose ? 
 The promise at Genesis 3 : 15 indicates that immediately after Adam and Eve sinned , Jehovah determined that his symbolic woman was to bring forth a seed , or son . 
 Jehovah also foresaw the result of the enmity between his woman and Satan and between their opposing seeds . 
 Although Jehovah would allow the Seed of God’s woman to suffer a bruising in the heel , in God’s due time , the Seed would bruise the serpent , or Satan the Devil , in the head . 
 In the meantime , Jehovah’s purpose unfailingly advanced through the chosen genealogical line down to Jesus ’ appearing as the promised Messiah . ​ — Luke 3 : 15 , 23 - 38 ; Galatians 4 : 4 . 
 What Jehovah Foreordains 
 Did Jehovah predetermine from the beginning that Adam and Eve would sin ? 
 Explain . 
 Speaking about the role that Jesus played in God’s purpose , the apostle Peter wrote : “ He [ Jesus ] was foreknown before the founding of the world , but he was made manifest at the end of the times for the sake of you . ” 
 Did Jehovah predetermine from the beginning that Adam and Eve would sin and that the ransom sacrifice provided by means of Jesus Christ would be needed ? 
 No . 
 The word “ founding ” is translated from a Greek term that literally means “ throwing down of seed . ” 
 Had there been a “ throwing down of seed , ” or a conceiving of human offspring , before Adam and Eve sinned ? 
 No . 
 It was after their act of disobedience that Adam and Eve brought forth children . 
 So following the rebellion but before the conception of offspring by Adam and Eve , Jehovah foreordained the appearance of the “ seed . ” 
 Jesus ’ death and resurrection provided the loving arrangement of the ransom , whereby inherited sin and all of Satan’s efforts are to be brought to nothing . ​ — Matthew 20 : 28 ; Hebrews 2 : 14 ; 1 John 3 : 8 . 
 What development did Jehovah foreordain in the outworking of his purpose ? 
 God foreordained another development in the outworking of his purpose . 
 This is indicated by what Paul wrote to the Ephesians , namely that God will “ gather all things together again in the Christ , the things in the heavens and the things on the earth . ” 
 Then , with reference to “ the things in the heavens , ” that is , those who are chosen as heirs with Christ , Paul explained : “ We were foreordained according to the purpose of him who operates all things according to the way his will counsels . ” 
 Yes , Jehovah determined ahead of time that a limited number of humans would make up a secondary part of the seed of God’s woman and share with Christ in dispensing the benefits of the ransom . 
 The apostle Peter refers to these as “ a holy nation . ” 
 The apostle John had the privilege of learning in a vision the number of those who would become Christ’s joint heirs ​ — 144,000 . 
 United with Christ as King , they serve “ for the praise of [ God’s ] glory . ” ​ — Ephesians 1 : 12 - 14 . 
 How do we know that the 144,000 are not predestined as individuals ? 
 The foreordination of the 144,000 does not mean that certain individuals were predestined to serve God faithfully in this way . 
 Indeed , the admonition in the Christian Greek Scriptures was written primarily to guide and strengthen anointed ones to maintain integrity and keep themselves worthy of their heavenly calling . 
 Jehovah knows in advance that 144,000 individuals will qualify to serve his purpose . 
 Who they prove to be depends on how those invited individually choose to live their life , a decision that each one of them must make personally . ​ — Matthew 24 : 13 . 
 What Jehovah Foreknows 
 13 , 14 . 
 With what does the way Jehovah exercises his foreknowledge harmonize , and why ? 
 Since Jehovah is a God of prophecy and purpose , how does he exercise his foreknowledge ? 
 To begin with , we are assured that all of God’s ways are truthful , righteous , and loving . 
 When writing to Hebrew Christians of the first century C.E . , the apostle Paul confirmed that God’s oath and his promise make “ two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie . ” 
 In his letter to the disciple Titus , Paul also expressed this thought when he wrote that God “ cannot lie . ” ​ — Titus 1 : 2 . 
 Furthermore , although Jehovah has unlimited power , he never acts unjustly . 
 Moses described Jehovah as “ a God of faithfulness , with whom there is no injustice ; righteous and upright is he . ” 
 Whatever Jehovah does harmonizes with his wonderful personality . 
 His actions manifest the perfect harmony of his cardinal qualities of love , wisdom , justice , and power . 
 15 , 16 . 
 What prospects did Jehovah lay before Adam in the garden of Eden ? 
 Consider how all of this relates to the events in the garden of Eden . 
 As a loving Father , Jehovah provided everything human creatures needed . 
 He endowed Adam with the ability to think , to reason on a matter , and to reach a conclusion . 
 Unlike the animal creation , which is largely guided by instinct , Adam had the ability to make choices . 
 The result of this was that God looked down from his heavenly throne and saw “ everything he had made and , look ! 
 it was very good . ” ​ — Genesis 1 : 26 - 31 ; 2 Peter 2 : 12 . 
 When Jehovah chose to lay a command upon Adam not to eat of “ the tree of the knowledge of good and bad , ” He provided adequate instruction so that Adam could decide what to do . 
 He allowed Adam to eat from “ every tree of the garden ” except one and warned of the fatal results of eating the fruit of the forbidden tree . 
 He laid before Adam the consequences of his actions . 
 What would Adam do ? 
 Why can we say that Jehovah’s exercise of foreknowledge is selective ? 
 Jehovah apparently chose not to foresee what Adam ​ — and Eve — ​ would do , even though He has the ability to know everything in advance . 
 It is therefore a question , not of whether Jehovah can foresee the future , but of whether he chooses to do so . 
 Furthermore , we can reason that Jehovah , being a God of love , would not knowingly and cruelly predetermine that rebellion ​ — with all its sad consequences — ​ should take place . 
 Thus , as far as Jehovah’s exercise of foreknowledge is concerned , it is selective . 
 Why is Jehovah’s selective exercise of foreknowledge no indication of imperfection on his part ? 
 Does Jehovah’s selective exercise of his foreknowledge mean that he is somehow lacking , imperfect ? 
 No . 
 Moses described Jehovah as “ the Rock , ” adding : “ Perfect is his activity . ” 
 He was not to blame for the consequences of human sin . 
 The disastrous effects felt by all of us today stem from that unrighteous act of disobedience . 
 The apostle Paul clearly reasoned that “ through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin , and thus death spread to all men because they had all sinned . ” ​ — Deuteronomy 32 : 4 , 5 ; Romans 5 : 12 ; Jeremiah 10 : 23 . 
 What questions will be considered in the next article ? 
 So far in our discussion , we have seen that there is no injustice with Jehovah . 
 Rather , Jehovah’s abilities , moral qualities , and standards support his purpose . 
 As the God of prophecy , Jehovah tells “ from the beginning the finale , and from long ago the things that have not been done . ” 
 We have also seen that his exercise of foreknowledge is selective . 
 Where , then , do we fit in ? 
 How can we make sure that our decisions conform to God’s loving purpose ? 
 And what blessings will doing so bring us ? 
 The next article will consider these questions . 
 [ Footnote ] 
 See the brochure A Book for All People , page 28 , published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 Can You Explain ? 
 • What ancient examples testify that God’s “ word ” always has “ certain success ” ? 
 • What has Jehovah foreordained in connection with his “ eternal purpose ” ? 
 • In what way does Jehovah exercise his foreknowledge ? 
 [ Picture on page 22 ] 
 Jehoshaphat had confidence in Jehovah 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 God foretold Jesus ’ death and resurrection 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 Did Jehovah foreordain what Adam and Eve would do ? 
 ‘ Choose Life to Keep Alive ’ 
 “ I have put life and death before you , the blessing and the malediction ; and you must choose life in order that you may keep alive . ” ​ — DEUTERONOMY 30 : 19 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 In what ways was man created in God’s image ? 
 “ LET us make man in our image , according to our likeness . ” 
 That divine statement is recorded in the first chapter of the Bible . 
 Accordingly , “ God proceeded to create the man in his image , in God’s image he created him , ” reports Genesis 1 : 26 , 27 . 
 Thus the first human differed from all other creations on earth . 
 He resembled his Creator , able to reflect a godlike attitude in reasoning , in demonstrating love , justice , wisdom , and power . 
 He had the faculty of conscience to help him reach decisions that would benefit himself and please his heavenly Parent . 
 In short , Adam had free will . 
 Observing the makeup of his earthly son , Jehovah made this assessment of his handiwork : “ Look ! 
 it [ is ] very good . ” ​ — Genesis 1 : 31 ; Psalm 95 : 6 . 
 As Adam’s descendants , we too are in God’s image and likeness . 
 However , do we really have a choice in what we do ? 
 Although Jehovah has the ability to know in advance what will happen , he does not predetermine our individual actions and destiny . 
 He never allows his earthly children to be ruled by predestination . 
 To help us grasp the importance of exercising our free will to make right choices , let us first of all learn a lesson from the nation of Israel . ​ — Romans 15 : 4 . 
 Freedom of Choice in Israel 
 What was the first of the Ten Commandments , and how did faithful Israelites choose to obey it ? 
 “ I am Jehovah your God , who brought you out of the land of Egypt , out of the house of slaves , ” said Jehovah to the Israelites . 
 In 1513 B.C.E . , the nation of Israel experienced a miraculous deliverance from Egyptian bondage and therefore had no reason to doubt those words . 
 In the first of the Ten Commandments , Jehovah through his spokesman Moses declared : “ You must not have any other gods against my face . ” 
 On that occasion , the nation of Israel chose to obey . 
 They willingly gave Jehovah their exclusive devotion . ​ — Exodus 20 : 5 ; Numbers 25 : 11 . 
 ( a ) What choice did Moses place before Israel ? 
 ( b ) What choice do we have today ? 
 Some 40 years later , Moses forcefully reminded another generation of Israelites of the choice before them . 
 “ I do take the heavens and the earth as witnesses against you today , ” he declared , “ that I have put life and death before you , the blessing and the malediction ; and you must choose life in order that you may keep alive , you and your offspring . ” 
 Similarly today , we can choose . 
 Yes , we can make a choice to serve Jehovah faithfully with everlasting life in view , or we can choose to disobey him and suffer the consequences . 
 Consider two examples of people who made contrasting choices . 
 5 , 6 . 
 What choice did Joshua make , and with what outcome ? 
 In 1473 B.C.E . , Joshua led the Israelites into the Promised Land . 
 In a powerful exhortation uttered before his death , Joshua entreated the whole nation : “ Now if it is bad in your eyes to serve Jehovah , choose for yourselves today whom you will serve , whether the gods that your forefathers who were on the other side of the River served or the gods of the Amorites in whose land you are dwelling . ” 
 Then , referring to his family , he continued : “ As for me and my household , we shall serve Jehovah . ” ​ — Joshua 24 : 15 . 
 Earlier , Jehovah had urged Joshua to be courageous and strong , instructing him not to deviate from obedience to God’s Law . 
 Rather , by reading the book of the Law in an undertone day and night , Joshua would be able to make his way successful . 
 And so it proved to be . 
 Joshua’s choice led to blessings . 
 “ Not a promise failed out of all the good promise that Jehovah had made to the house of Israel , ” Joshua declared . 
 “ It all came true . ” ​ — Joshua 21 : 45 . 
 In Isaiah’s day , what choice did some Israelites make , and with what consequences ? 
 In contrast , consider the situation in Israel some 700 years later . 
 By that time , many Israelites were following pagan customs . 
 For example , on the last day of the year , people gathered around a table spread with a variety of tasty foods and sweet wine . 
 This was no simple family get - together . 
 It was a religious ceremony that honored two pagan deities . 
 The prophet Isaiah recorded God’s view of this unfaithfulness : “ You men are those leaving Jehovah , those forgetting my holy mountain , those setting in order a table for the god of Good Luck and those filling up mixed wine for the god of Destiny . ” 
 They believed that the year’s harvest depended , not on having Jehovah’s blessing , but on appeasing “ the god of Good Luck ” and “ the god of Destiny . ” 
 In reality , though , their rebellious course and willful choice sealed their destiny . 
 “ I will destine you men to the sword , ” Jehovah declared , “ and you will all of you bow down to being slaughtered ; for the reason that I called , but you did not answer ; I spoke , but you did not listen ; and you kept doing what was bad in my eyes , and the thing in which I took no delight you chose . ” 
 Their unwise choice brought destruction upon them , and the gods of Destiny and Good Luck were powerless to prevent it . 
 Making the Right Choice 
 According to Deuteronomy 30 : 20 , what is involved in making the right choice ? 
 When Moses exhorted Israel to choose life , he pointed out three steps that they should take : “ By loving Jehovah your God , by listening to his voice and by sticking to him . ” 
 Let us examine each of these so that we may make the right choice . 
 How can we demonstrate our love for Jehovah ? 
 By loving Jehovah our God : We choose to serve Jehovah because we love him . 
 Heeding the warning examples from Israel’s day , we resist all temptations to commit immorality and we shun lifestyles that may cause us to sink into the world’s morass of materialism . 
 We cleave to Jehovah and keep his regulations . 
 Before the Israelites entered the Promised Land , Moses exhorted them : “ See , I have taught you regulations and judicial decisions , just as Jehovah my God has commanded me , for you to do that way in the midst of the land to which you are going to take possession of it . 
 And you must keep and do them , because this is wisdom on your part and understanding on your part before the eyes of the peoples who will hear of all these regulations . ” 
 Now is the time to demonstrate our love for Jehovah by putting Jehovah’s will first in our life . 
 We will surely be blessed if we choose to do so . ​ — Matthew 6 : 33 . 
 10 - 12 . 
 What lessons do we learn from considering what happened in the days of Noah ? 
 By listening to God’s voice : Noah was “ a preacher of righteousness . ” 
 Virtually all the people of the pre - Flood world were distracted and “ took no note ” of Noah’s warnings . 
 The consequence ? 
 “ The flood came and swept them all away . ” 
 Jesus warned that our day , during “ the presence of the Son of man , ” would be similar . 
 What happened in Noah’s day serves as a stark warning for people today who choose not to heed God’s message . ​ — Matthew 24 : 39 . 
 Those who ridicule the divine warnings sounded by God’s modern - day servants should realize what failure to heed the warnings will mean . 
 Of such ridiculers , the apostle Peter stated : “ According to their wish , this fact escapes their notice , that there were heavens from of old and an earth standing compactly out of water and in the midst of water by the word of God ; and by those means the world of that time suffered destruction when it was deluged with water . 
 But by the same word the heavens and the earth that are now are stored up for fire and are being reserved to the day of judgment and of destruction of the ungodly men . ” ​ — 2 Peter 3 : 3 - 7 . 
 Contrast this with the choice Noah and his household made . 
 “ By faith Noah , after being given divine warning of things not yet beheld , showed godly fear and constructed an ark . ” 
 His heeding the warning brought salvation to his household . 
 May we prove to be swift about hearing God’s message and then obediently heed it . ​ — James 1 : 19 , 22 - 25 . 
 13 , 14 . ( a ) Why is ‘ sticking to Jehovah ’ vital ? 
 ( b ) How should we allow Jehovah , “ our Potter , ” to mold us ? 
 By sticking to Jehovah : To ‘ choose life and keep alive , ’ not only must we love Jehovah and listen to him but we must also ‘ stick to Jehovah , ’ that is , persist in doing his will . 
 “ By endurance on your part you will acquire your souls , ” said Jesus . 
 Actually , the choice we make in this regard reveals what is in our heart . 
 “ Happy is the man that is feeling dread constantly , but he that is hardening his heart will fall into calamity , ” observes Proverbs 28 : 14 . 
 Pharaoh of ancient Egypt was an example of this . 
 As each of the Ten Plagues befell Egypt , Pharaoh hardened his heart rather than displayed godly fear . 
 Jehovah did not force Pharaoh into a course of disobedience but allowed that proud ruler to choose . 
 In any case , Jehovah’s will was accomplished , as the apostle Paul explained regarding Jehovah’s view of Pharaoh : “ For this very cause I have let you remain , that in connection with you I may show my power , and that my name may be declared in all the earth . ” ​ — Romans 9 : 17 . 
 Centuries after Israel’s deliverance from Pharaoh’s control , the prophet Isaiah declared : “ O Jehovah , you are our Father . 
 We are the clay , and you are our Potter ; and all of us are the work of your hand . ” 
 As we allow Jehovah to mold us through our personal study and application of his Word , we gradually put on the new personality . 
 We become more meek and malleable , making it easier for us to stick loyally to Jehovah because we sincerely want to please him . ​ — Ephesians 4 : 23 , 24 ; Colossians 3 : 8 - 10 . 
 “ You Must Make Them Known ” 
 According to Deuteronomy 4 : 9 , Moses reminded Israel of what twofold responsibility ? 
 To the assembled nation of Israel poised to enter the Promised Land , Moses said : “ Only watch out for yourself and take good care of your soul , that you may not forget the things that your eyes have seen and that they may not depart from your heart all the days of your life ; and you must make them known to your sons and to your grandsons . ” 
 In order to have Jehovah’s blessing and prosper in the land they were about to inherit , the people had to fulfill a twofold responsibility before Jehovah their God . 
 They were not to forget the marvelous things Jehovah had performed before their eyes , and they were to teach them to future generations . 
 As God’s people today , we must do the same if we want to ‘ choose life and keep alive . ’ 
 What have we seen with our eyes that Jehovah has performed in our behalf ? 
 16 , 17 . ( a ) What have Gilead - trained missionaries been able to accomplish in the Kingdom - preaching work ? 
 ( b ) What examples of undiminished zeal do you know ? 
 We are thrilled to see how Jehovah has blessed our preaching and disciple - making work . 
 Since the opening of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead in 1943 , missionaries have spearheaded the disciple - making work in many lands . 
 To this day , early graduates of this school maintain a zeal for Kingdom preaching , even though they are advanced in years and some are hampered by physical limitations . 
 One fine example is Mary Olson , who graduated from Gilead in 1944 . 
 She has served as a missionary first in Uruguay , then in Colombia , and now in Puerto Rico . 
 Although somewhat restricted by physical problems brought on by old age , Sister Olson maintains her enthusiasm for preaching . 
 Putting her knowledge of the Spanish language to use , she schedules time each week to join local publishers in the field ministry . 
 Now widowed , Nancy Porter , who graduated from Gilead School in 1947 , still serves in the Bahamas . 
 She is another missionary who keeps busy in the preaching work . 
 “ Teaching others Bible truth has been a special source of joy , ” reports Sister Porter in her life story . 
 * “ It provides an orderly spiritual routine that has given structure and stability to my life . ” 
 When Sister Porter and other faithful servants look back , they do not forget what Jehovah has done . 
 What about us ? 
 Do we look appreciatively at the way Jehovah has blessed the Kingdom work in our neighborhood ? ​ — Psalm 68 : 11 . 
 What can we learn from reading the life stories of missionaries ? 
 We rejoice in what these old - timers have accomplished and still accomplish . 
 Reading their life stories is a source of encouragement to us because when we see what Jehovah has done for these faithful ones , it strengthens our determination to serve Jehovah . 
 Do you regularly read such thrilling accounts published in The Watchtower and meditate on them ? 
 How can Christian parents make good use of the life stories recorded in The Watchtower ? 
 Moses reminded the Israelites that they were not to forget all the things Jehovah had done for them and that these things should not depart from their heart all the days of their life . 
 He then added a further step : “ You must make them known to your sons and to your grandsons . ” 
 True stories have a special appeal . 
 Youngsters growing up need good examples . 
 Single sisters can learn lessons from the faithful example of older sisters whose life stories are related in The Watchtower . 
 Service in a foreign - language territory in their home country offers both brothers and sisters expanded opportunities to be busy in preaching the good news . 
 Christian parents , why not use the experiences of faithful Gilead missionaries and others to provide an incentive for your children to choose a life of full - time service ? 
 What must we do to “ choose life ” ? 
 How , then , can each of us “ choose life ” ? 
 By using the wonderful gift of free will to show Jehovah that we love him and by continuing to do our best in his service as long as he allows us that privilege . 
 “ For , ” as Moses declared , Jehovah “ is your life and the length of your days . ” ​ — Deuteronomy 30 : 19 , 20 . 
 [ Footnote ] 
 See “ Joyous and Thankful Despite Heartbreaking Loss , ” published in The Watchtower of June 1 , 2001 , pages 23 - 7 . 
 Can You Recall ? 
 • What have you learned from the examples of contrasting choices we have considered ? 
 • What steps must we take in order to “ choose life ” ? 
 • What twofold responsibility are we urged to fulfill ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 “ I have put life and death before you ” 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 Listening to God’s voice brought salvation to Noah and his family 
 [ Picture on page 30 ] 
 Mary Olson 
 [ Picture on page 30 ] 
 Nancy Porter 
 “ How I Do Love Your Law ! ” 
 “ How I do love your law ! 
 All day long it is my concern . ” ​ — PSALM 119 : 97 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) What situation did the inspired writer of Psalm 119 face ? 
 ( b ) How did he react , and why ? 
 THE writer of Psalm 119 faced a severe trial . 
 Presumptuous enemies who disregarded God’s law derided him and smeared him with falsehood . 
 Princes took counsel against him and persecuted him . 
 The wicked surrounded him , and his very life was endangered . 
 All of this made him “ sleepless from grief . ” 
 In the face of this trial , the psalmist sang : “ How I do love your law ! 
 All day long it is my concern . ” ​ — Psalm 119 : 97 . 
 You would do well to ask , “ How could God’s law be a source of solace and comfort to the psalmist ? ” 
 What sustained him was his confidence that Jehovah was interested in him . 
 Being acquainted with the loving provisions of that law made the psalmist happy , despite the hardships brought upon him by his opposers . 
 He recognized that Jehovah had dealt well with him . 
 Moreover , applying the guidance from God’s law made the psalmist wiser than his enemies and had even preserved him alive . 
 Obeying the law gave him peace and a good conscience . ​ — Psalm 119 : 1 , 9 , 65 , 93 , 98 , 165 . 
 Why is it a challenge for Christians to live according to godly standards today ? 
 Some of God’s servants today are also undergoing grueling tests of their faith . 
 We may not face a life - threatening crisis as the psalmist did , but we do live in “ critical times hard to deal with . ” 
 Many people with whom we are in daily contact have no love for spiritual values ​ — their goals are self - centered and materialistic , their attitude arrogant and irreverent . 
 Young Christians regularly have to deal with threats to their moral integrity . 
 In such an environment , it can be difficult to maintain our love for Jehovah and for what is right . 
 How can we protect ourselves ? 
 How did the psalmist show appreciation for God’s law , and should Christians do likewise ? 
 What helped the psalmist to withstand the pressures he experienced was his dedicating time to pore over God’s law with appreciation . 
 In that way he came to love it . 
 Indeed , almost every verse of Psalm 119 mentions some facet of Jehovah’s law . 
 * Christians today are not bound by the Mosaic Law , which God gave to the ancient nation of Israel . 
 However , the principles expressed in that Law are of enduring value . 
 These principles were a comfort to the psalmist , as they can be for God’s servants who are struggling to deal with the difficulties of modern life . 
 What aspects of the Mosaic Law are we going to consider ? 
 Let us see what encouragement we can gain from just three aspects of the Mosaic Law : the Sabbath arrangement , the provision for gleaning , and the commandment against covetousness . 
 In each case , we will find that an appreciation for the principles behind these laws is vital if we are to meet the challenges that characterize our times . 
 Satisfying Our Spiritual Need 
 What fundamental needs do all people have ? 
 Mankind was created with a number of needs . 
 Food , drink , and shelter , for example , are essential if a person is to remain in good physical health . 
 Yet , man also has to care for his “ spiritual need . ” 
 He will not be truly happy unless he does that . 
 Jehovah considered the satisfying of this innate need to be so fundamental that he commanded his people to interrupt their normal activities for one whole day each week in order to give attention to spiritual matters . 
 7 , 8 . ( a ) How did God make a distinction between the Sabbath and other days ? 
 ( b ) What purpose did the Sabbath serve ? 
 The Sabbath arrangement emphasized the importance of spiritual pursuits . 
 The first occurrence of the word “ sabbath ” in the Bible is in connection with the provision of manna in the wilderness . 
 The Israelites were told that they should collect this miraculous bread for six days . 
 On the sixth day , they were to collect “ the bread of two days , ” for on the seventh , none would be provided . 
 The seventh day would be “ a holy sabbath to Jehovah , ” during which each one should keep sitting in his own place . 
 One of the Ten Commandments mandated that no work at all was to be done on the Sabbath . 
 The day was sacred . 
 The penalty for not observing it was death . ​ — Exodus 20 : 8 - 11 ; Numbers 15 : 32 - 36 . 
 The Sabbath law showed Jehovah’s concern for both the physical and the spiritual welfare of his people . 
 “ The sabbath came into existence for the sake of man , ” said Jesus . 
 It not only allowed the Israelites to rest but also gave them the opportunity to draw close to and show love for their Creator . 
 It was a day dedicated exclusively to spiritual interests . 
 That included family worship , prayer , and meditation on God’s Law . 
 The arrangement served to protect the Israelites from using all their time and energy in material pursuits . 
 The Sabbath reminded them that their relationship with Jehovah was the most important thing in their lives . 
 Jesus reiterated that unchanging principle when he said : “ It is written , ‘ Man must live , not on bread alone , but on every utterance coming forth through Jehovah’s mouth . ’ ” ​ — Matthew 4 : 4 . 
 What lesson does the Sabbath arrangement provide for Christians ? 
 God’s people are no longer required to observe a literal 24 - hour sabbath rest , but the Sabbath arrangement remains much more than a historical curiosity . 
 Is it not a reminder that we too must give spiritual activities priority ? 
 Sacred interests must not be overshadowed by material preoccupations or recreational pursuits . 
 So we might ask ourselves : “ What takes first place in my life ? 
 Am I giving priority to study , prayer , attendance at Christian meetings , and the sharing of the good news of the Kingdom ? 
 Or are other interests crowding out such activities ? ” 
 If we put spiritual matters first in our lives , Jehovah assures us that we will not lack the necessities of life . ​ — Matthew 6 : 24 - 33 . 
 How can we benefit from dedicating time to spiritual matters ? 
 Periods spent studying the Bible and related publications , as well as thinking deeply about their message , can help us to draw closer to Jehovah . 
 Susan , who some 40 years ago began setting aside time for regular Bible study , acknowledges that at first it was not fun . 
 It was a chore . 
 But the more she read , the more she enjoyed it . 
 Now she really misses her personal study if for some reason she cannot get to it . 
 “ Study has helped me to get to know Jehovah as a Father , ” she says . 
 “ I can trust him , rely upon him , and freely approach him in prayer . 
 It is really overwhelming to see how much Jehovah loves his servants , how he cares for me personally , and how he has acted in my behalf . ” 
 What great joy we too can have from regularly attending to our spiritual needs ! 
 God’s Law on Gleaning 
 How did the gleaning arrangement work ? 
 A second aspect of the Mosaic Law that reflected God’s concern for his people’s welfare was the right to glean . 
 Jehovah ordered that when an Israelite farmer reaped the fruits of his field , the needy should be allowed to collect what harvest workers left behind . 
 Farmers were not to reap the edges of their fields completely , nor were they to gather the leftover grapes or olives . 
 Sheaves of grain inadvertently left in the fields should not be retrieved . 
 This was a loving arrangement in behalf of the poor , the alien residents , the orphans , and the widows . 
 Granted , gleaning required hard work on their part , yet by means of it , they could avoid having to beg . ​ — Leviticus 19 : 9 , 10 ; Deuteronomy 24 : 19 - 22 ; Psalm 37 : 25 . 
 What opportunity did the gleaning arrangement give to farmers ? 
 The law on gleaning did not stipulate how much produce farmers were to leave for the needy . 
 It was up to them whether the borders of unreaped grain around the edges of their fields would be wide or narrow . 
 In this , the arrangement taught generosity . 
 It gave farmers the opportunity to show their appreciation to the Provider of the harvest , since “ the one showing favor to the poor one is glorifying [ his Maker ] . ” 
 Boaz was one who did so . 
 He kindly made sure that Ruth , a widow who gleaned in his fields , would collect a good quantity of grain . 
 Jehovah amply rewarded Boaz for his generosity . ​ — Ruth 2 : 15 , 16 ; 4 : 21 , 22 ; Proverbs 19 : 17 . 
 What does the ancient law on gleaning teach us ? 
 The principle behind the law on gleaning has not changed . 
 Jehovah expects his servants to be generous , especially toward the needy . 
 The more generous we are , the greater our blessings will be . 
 “ Practice giving , and people will give to you , ” said Jesus . 
 “ They will pour into your laps a fine measure , pressed down , shaken together and overflowing . 
 For with the measure that you are measuring out , they will measure out to you in return . ” ​ — Luke 6 : 38 . 
 14 , 15 . 
 How can we manifest generosity , and with what possible benefits both to us and to those whom we help ? 
 The apostle Paul recommended that we “ work what is good toward all , but especially toward those related to us in the faith . ” 
 Thus , we certainly need to be concerned that fellow Christians receive spiritual help whenever they face tests of their faith . 
 But might they also need practical help , for example , in getting to the Kingdom Hall or in doing their grocery shopping ? 
 Are there any elderly , sick , or housebound ones in your congregation who would appreciate an encouraging visit or a helping hand ? 
 If we make an effort to be sensitive to such needs , then Jehovah might be able to use us to answer the prayers of a needy one . 
 While caring for one another is a Christian obligation , doing so also helps the caregiver . 
 Showing genuine love to fellow worshippers is a source of great joy and deep satisfaction that wins us Jehovah’s smile of approval . ​ — Proverbs 15 : 29 . 
 Another important way in which Christians show an unselfish attitude is by using their time and energy to speak about God’s purposes . 
 Anyone who has had the joy of helping another person to arrive at the point of dedicating his life to Jehovah knows the truth of Jesus ’ words : “ There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving . ” ​ — Acts 20 : 35 . 
 Guarding Against Covetousness 
 16 , 17 . 
 What did the tenth commandment prohibit , and why ? 
 The third aspect of God’s Law to Israel that we are going to consider is the tenth commandment , which prohibited covetousness . 
 The Law stated : “ You must not desire your fellowman’s house . 
 You must not desire your fellowman’s wife , nor his slave man nor his slave girl nor his bull nor his ass nor anything that belongs to your fellowman . ” 
 No human could enforce such a commandment , since no one can read hearts . 
 That commandment , however , elevated the Law to a plane higher than that of human justice . 
 It made each Israelite aware that he was directly accountable to Jehovah , who can read the inclinations of the heart . 
 Moreover , this commandment got to the very root of many illicit acts . ​ — James 1 : 14 . 
 The law against covetousness encouraged God’s people to avoid materialism , greed , and grumbling about their lot in life . 
 It also safeguarded them from the temptation to commit theft or immorality . 
 There will always be those who have material possessions that we admire or who in one way or another seem to be more successful than we are . 
 If we fail to control our thinking in such situations , we could become unhappy and feel envious of others . 
 The Bible calls covetousness a manifestation of “ a disapproved mental state . ” 
 We are far better off without it . ​ — Romans 1 : 28 - 30 . 
 What spirit prevails in the world today , and what negative effects can it produce ? 
 The spirit prevailing in the world today promotes materialism and competition . 
 Through advertising , commerce arouses desires for new products and often conveys the idea that we are not going to be happy unless we acquire them . 
 This is exactly the kind of spirit that Jehovah’s Law condemned . 
 Related to it is the desire to get ahead in life at any cost and to accumulate wealth . 
 The apostle Paul warned : “ Those who are determined to be rich fall into temptation and a snare and many senseless and hurtful desires , which plunge men into destruction and ruin . 
 For the love of money is a root of all sorts of injurious things , and by reaching out for this love some have been led astray from the faith and have stabbed themselves all over with many pains . ” ​ — 1 Timothy 6 : 9 , 10 . 
 19 , 20 . ( a ) For the lover of Jehovah’s law , what things are truly valuable ? 
 ( b ) What will be the subject of the next article ? 
 Those who love God’s law recognize the dangers of a materialistic spirit and are protected from it . 
 The psalmist , for example , prayed to Jehovah : “ Incline my heart to your reminders , and not to profits . 
 The law of your mouth is good for me , more so than thousands of pieces of gold and silver . ” 
 Being convinced of the truth of these words will help us to maintain the balance necessary to avoid the snares of materialism , greed , and dissatisfaction with our lot in life . 
 “ Godly devotion , ” not the amassing of possessions , is the key to the greatest gain possible . ​ — 1 Timothy 6 : 6 . 
 The principles behind the Law that Jehovah gave to the ancient nation of Israel are as valuable in our difficult times as they were when Jehovah gave that Law to Moses . 
 The more we apply these principles in our lives , the more we will appreciate them , the more we will come to love them , and the happier we will be . 
 The Law preserves many valuable lessons for us , and vivid reminders of their worth are presented by the lives and experiences of Bible characters . 
 Some of these will be considered in the following article . 
 [ Footnote ] 
 All but 4 of the 176 verses of this psalm mention either Jehovah’s commandments , judicial decisions , law , orders , regulations , reminders , sayings , statutes , ways , or word . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • Why did the writer of Psalm 119 love Jehovah’s law ? 
 • What can Christians learn from the Sabbath arrangement ? 
 • Of what lasting value is God’s law on gleaning ? 
 • How does the commandment against covetousness protect us ? 
 [ Picture on page 21 ] 
 What did the Sabbath law emphasize ? 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 What does the law on gleaning teach us ? 
 “ Your Reminders Are What I Am Fond Of ” 
 “ All the things that were written aforetime were written for our instruction . ” ​ — ROMANS 15 : 4 . 
 How does Jehovah give us reminders , and why do we need them ? 
 JEHOVAH provides his people with reminders in order to help them deal with the pressures of these difficult times . 
 Some of these reminders come to the fore during personal Bible reading , while others take the form of information or comments presented at Christian meetings . 
 Much of what we read or hear on these occasions is not new to us . 
 Likely , we have considered similar information before . 
 Since we are inclined to forget , though , we continually need to refresh our memories with regard to Jehovah’s purposes , laws , and instructions . 
 We should appreciate God’s reminders . 
 They renew our spirit by helping us to keep in focus the reasons that motivated us to adopt a godly life course . 
 Thus , the psalmist sang to Jehovah : “ Your reminders are what I am fond of . ” ​ — Psalm 119 : 24 . 
 2 , 3 . ( a ) Why did Jehovah preserve down to our day the life stories of Bible characters ? 
 ( b ) Which episodes from the Scriptures will be considered in this article ? 
 Though penned many centuries ago , God’s Word is dynamic . 
 It presents us with true accounts of the lives of Bible characters . 
 While customs and points of view have changed much since Bible times , the challenges we have to face are often similar to those faced back then . 
 Many stories preserved for our benefit in the Bible offer us touching examples of people who loved Jehovah and served him faithfully despite adverse circumstances . 
 Other accounts call attention to the kind of conduct that God hates . 
 Jehovah had all these personal histories , good and bad , included in the Bible as reminders . 
 It is as the apostle Paul wrote : “ All the things that were written aforetime were written for our instruction , that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope . ” ​ — Romans 15 : 4 . 
 Let us focus on three episodes from the Scriptures : the account of David’s dealings with Saul , that of Ananias and Sapphira , and that of Joseph’s conduct with Potiphar’s wife . 
 Each of these teaches us valuable lessons . 
 Loyalty to God’s Arrangements 
 4 , 5 . ( a ) What situation existed involving King Saul and David ? 
 ( b ) How did David react to Saul’s animosity ? 
 King Saul proved unfaithful to Jehovah and unworthy to rule over His people . 
 So God rejected him and directed the prophet Samuel to anoint David as the future king of Israel . 
 When David showed prowess as a warrior and received acclaim from the people , Saul began to view David as a rival . 
 Saul repeatedly tried to do away with him . 
 David survived on each occasion because Jehovah was with him . ​ — 1 Samuel 18 : 6 - 12 , 25 ; 19 : 10 , 11 . 
 For years , David was forced to live as a fugitive . 
 When the opportunity arose to kill Saul , David’s companions urged him to do so , saying that Jehovah was giving David’s enemy into his hand . 
 Yet , David refused . 
 His loyalty to Jehovah and his respect for Saul’s position as anointed king of God’s people moved him to act this way . 
 Jehovah had appointed Saul as king of Israel , had he not ? 
 Jehovah would also remove him when he saw fit to do so . 
 David reasoned that it was not his business to intervene . 
 After doing all that he could under the circumstances to soften Saul’s antagonism toward him , David concluded : “ Jehovah himself will deal him a blow ; or his day will come and he will have to die , or down into battle he will go , and he will certainly be swept away . 
 It is unthinkable , on my part , from Jehovah’s standpoint , to thrust my hand out against the anointed of Jehovah ! ” ​ — 1 Samuel 24 : 3 - 15 ; 26 : 7 - 20 . 
 Why is the story of David and Saul of interest to us ? 
 This account contains a vital lesson . 
 Have you ever found yourself asking why certain problems arise in the Christian congregation ? 
 It could be that an individual is acting in a way that is not appropriate . 
 His conduct may not amount to gross wrongdoing , but it disturbs you . 
 How should you react ? 
 Out of Christian interest in that person and out of loyalty to Jehovah , you may choose to speak with him in a kindly way , with the aim of winning him over . 
 What , though , if the problem persists ? 
 After you have done all that you reasonably can , you may want to leave the matter in Jehovah’s hands . 
 That is what David did . 
 In imitation of David , how should we react if we experience injustice or prejudice ? 
 Or you might be facing problems of social injustice or religious prejudice . 
 Possibly there is little or nothing you can do about them at this time . 
 Such a situation can be very difficult to endure , but David’s reaction to injustice teaches us a lesson . 
 The psalms David wrote are a poignant record not only of his heartfelt prayers for God to keep him out of Saul’s clutches but also of his loyalty to Jehovah and his concern for the glorification of God’s name . 
 David remained loyal to Jehovah even though Saul continued to act in an unjust way for years . 
 We too should remain faithful to Jehovah and to his organization regardless of injustices we suffer and regardless of what others do . 
 We can rest assured that Jehovah is fully aware of the situation . ​ — Psalm 86 : 2 . 
 How did Jehovah’s Witnesses in Mozambique react when their loyalty to Jehovah was put to the test ? 
 Christians in Mozambique provide a modern - day example of some who loyally stuck to Jehovah in a time of testing . 
 In 1984 their villages were repeatedly raided by armed members of a resistance movement , who robbed , burned houses , and killed . 
 There seemed little that these true Christians could do to defend themselves . 
 The inhabitants of the area were subjected to efforts to recruit them into a militarized movement or to force them to support it in other ways . 
 Jehovah’s Witnesses considered doing so to be incompatible with their position of Christian neutrality . 
 Their refusal was met with rage . 
 As many as 30 Witnesses were killed in that turbulent period , but not even the threat of death could break the loyalty of God’s people . 
 * Like David , they endured injustices but eventually came off victorious . 
 A Warning Reminder 
 9 , 10 . ( a ) How can we benefit from certain Scriptural examples ? 
 ( b ) What was wrong with Ananias and Sapphira’s actions ? 
 Some of the individuals mentioned in the Scriptures provide warning reminders about conduct to be avoided . 
 Indeed , the Bible contains many accounts of people , even among God’s servants , who did wrong and suffered the consequences . 
 One such account is that of Ananias and Sapphira , a married couple who were members of the first - century Christian congregation in Jerusalem . 
 After Pentecost 33 C.E . , the need arose to provide materially for new believers who remained in Jerusalem to benefit from association with the apostles . 
 Some members of the congregation sold property to ensure that no one was in need . 
 Ananias and Sapphira sold a field and brought only part of the proceeds to the apostles , claiming that their gift represented all the funds received from the sale . 
 Granted , Ananias and Sapphira were entitled to give as much or as little as they wanted , but their motive was bad , and their actions were dishonest . 
 They wanted to make a good impression and appear to be doing more than they actually were . 
 The apostle Peter , under the inspiration of holy spirit , unmasked their dishonesty and hypocrisy , and Jehovah struck them dead . ​ — Acts 5 : 1 - 10 . 
 11 , 12 . ( a ) What are some reminders about honesty ? 
 ( b ) What benefits come from being honest ? 
 If we are ever tempted to distort the truth in an attempt to make people think well of us , may the story of Ananias and Sapphira stand as a sober reminder . 
 We might be able to deceive fellow humans , but we cannot fool Jehovah . 
 Time and again the Scriptures exhort us to be honest with one another , for liars will have no place in an earth swept clean of unrighteousness . 
 The reason for that should be clear . 
 The promoter of all untruth is none other than Satan the Devil . ​ — John 8 : 44 . 
 Making honesty our way of life brings numerous benefits . 
 Among them are a clean conscience and the satisfaction of being trusted by others . 
 In many cases , because they were honest , Christians have obtained employment or have kept their jobs . 
 The most important benefit , though , is that honesty wins us the friendship of Almighty God . ​ — Psalm 15 : 1 , 2 . 
 Maintaining Chastity 
 In what situation did Joseph find himself , and how did he react ? 
 Joseph , a son of the patriarch Jacob , was sold into slavery at the age of 17 . 
 He eventually found himself in the household of Potiphar , an Egyptian court official , where Joseph caught the attention of his master’s wife . 
 She desired to have sexual intercourse with Joseph , who was a handsome young man , and day after day she kept urging him : “ Lie down with me . ” 
 Joseph was far from his family in a land where nobody knew him . 
 He may well have been able to have relations with this woman without other people being aware of it . 
 Yet , when Potiphar’s wife finally grabbed hold of him , Joseph fled . ​ — Genesis 37 : 2 , 18 - 28 ; 39 : 1 - 12 . 
 14 , 15 . ( a ) Why is Joseph’s story of interest to us ? 
 ( b ) Why was one Christian woman grateful that she heeded God’s reminders ? 
 Joseph was raised in a God - fearing family , and he understood that sexual relations between people who are not husband and wife are wrong . 
 “ How could I commit this great badness and actually sin against God ? ” 
 he asked . 
 His conclusion was likely guided by knowledge of God’s standard for humans as expressed in Eden , that of monogamy . 
 God’s people today can benefit from reflecting on the way Joseph reacted to that situation . 
 In some areas , attitudes toward sexual relations are so casual that youngsters who refuse to get involved in immorality are derided by their peers . 
 Extramarital relations among adults are common . 
 Hence , Joseph’s story is a timely reminder for us . 
 God’s standard still is that fornication and adultery are sins . 
 Many who have succumbed to pressure to engage in illicit sex agree that there is compelling reason not to do so . 
 Among the undesired results may be a sense of degradation , a troubled conscience , jealousies , pregnancy , and sexually transmitted disease . 
 Just as the Scriptures remind us , a person who practices fornication is “ sinning against his own body . ” ​ — 1 Corinthians 5 : 9 - 12 ; 6 : 18 ; Proverbs 6 : 23 - 29 , 32 . 
 Jenny , * a single Witness of Jehovah , has reason to appreciate God’s reminders . 
 At work , a handsome colleague made overtures to her . 
 When Jenny did not reciprocate , he intensified his attentions . 
 “ I found myself struggling to remain chaste , ” she admits , “ because it is flattering when someone of the opposite sex takes notice of you . ” 
 Yet , she realized that the man was only trying to add her to the number of women with whom he had had relations . 
 When she felt herself weakening in her resolve to resist , she supplicated Jehovah to help her remain faithful to Him . 
 Jenny found that the things she learned as she did research in the Bible and Christian publications were like reminders that served as a shot in the arm to keep her guard up . 
 One of those reminders was the story of Joseph and Potiphar’s wife . 
 “ As long as I keep reminding myself about how much I love Jehovah , ” she concludes , “ I need not fear that I will commit this great badness and sin against him . ” 
 Heed God’s Reminders ! 
 How can we benefit from reviewing and meditating on the lives of individuals mentioned in the Bible ? 
 We can all increase our appreciation for Jehovah’s standards by striving to understand why he had certain accounts preserved in the Scriptures for us . 
 What do they teach ? 
 What qualities or tendencies exemplified by Bible characters do we need to imitate or to avoid ? 
 Literally hundreds of individuals make their appearance in the pages of God’s Word . 
 All who love divine instruction would do well to cultivate an appetite for life - giving wisdom , including lessons we can learn from the examples that Jehovah has carefully preserved . 
 This magazine has often featured articles about such individuals whose stories have something to teach us . 
 Why not spend time reviewing these ? 
 How do you feel about Jehovah’s reminders , and why ? 
 How grateful we can be for the loving concern that Jehovah manifests for those who are striving to do his will ! 
 We are by no means perfect , just as the men and women mentioned in the Bible were not perfect . 
 However , the written record of their actions is an invaluable resource for us . 
 By heeding Jehovah’s reminders , we can avoid making costly mistakes , and we can imitate the fine examples of those who walked in the ways of righteousness . 
 If we do so , we will be able to sing with the psalmist : “ Happy are those observing [ Jehovah’s ] reminders ; with all the heart they keep searching for him . 
 My soul has kept your reminders , and I love them exceedingly . ” ​ — Psalm 119 : 2 , 167 . 
 [ Footnotes ] 
 See the 1996 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses , pages 160 - 2 . 
 Name has been changed . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • What can we learn from David’s attitude toward Saul ? 
 • The account of Ananias and Sapphira teaches us what ? 
 • Why is Joseph’s life story of particular interest today ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 Why did David refuse to allow Saul to be killed ? 
 [ Picture on page 27 ] 
 What do we learn from the account of Ananias and Sapphira ? 
 [ Picture on page 28 ] 
 What caused Joseph to reject immoral advances ? 
 They Were Born Into God’s Chosen Nation 
 “ It is you Jehovah your God has chosen to become his people . ” ​ — DEUTERONOMY 7 : 6 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What mighty acts did Jehovah perform in behalf of his people , and what relationship did the Israelites enter into with God ? 
 IN 1513 B.C.E . , Jehovah brought his servants on earth into a new relationship with him . 
 That year , he humiliated a world power and delivered the Israelites from slavery . 
 In so doing , he became their Savior and Owner . 
 Before acting , God told Moses : “ Say to the sons of Israel , ‘ I am Jehovah , and I shall certainly bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians and deliver you from their slavery , and I shall indeed reclaim you with an outstretched arm and with great judgments . 
 And I shall certainly take you as my people , and I shall indeed prove to be your God . ’ ” ​ — Exodus 6 : 6 , 7 , footnotes ; 15 : 1 - 7 , 11 . 
 Shortly after their Exodus from Egypt , the Israelites entered into a covenant relationship with their God , Jehovah . 
 Rather than dealing with individuals , families , or clans , henceforth Jehovah would have an organized people , a nation , on earth . 
 He provided his people with laws that governed their social order and , more important , their worship . 
 Moses said to them : “ What great nation is there that has gods near to it the way Jehovah our God is in all our calling upon him ? 
 And what great nation is there that has righteous regulations and judicial decisions like all this law that I am putting before you today ? ” ​ — Deuteronomy 4 : 7 , 8 . 
 Born Into a Nation of Witnesses 
 3 , 4 . 
 What was an important reason for Israel’s existence as a nation ? 
 Centuries later , Jehovah reminded the Israelites , through his prophet Isaiah , of an important reason for their existence as a nation . 
 Isaiah said : “ This is what Jehovah has said , your Creator , O Jacob , and your Former , O Israel : ‘ Do not be afraid , for I have repurchased you . 
 I have called you by your name . 
 You are mine . 
 For I am Jehovah your God , the Holy One of Israel your Savior . . . . 
 Bring my sons from far off , and my daughters from the extremity of the earth , everyone that is called by my name and that I have created for my own glory , that I have formed , yes , that I have made . 
 You are my witnesses , ’ is the utterance of Jehovah , ‘ even my servant whom I have chosen , . . . the people whom I have formed for myself , that they should recount the praise of me . ’ ” ​ — Isaiah 43 : 1 , 3 , 6 , 7 , 10 , 21 . 
 As a people called by Jehovah’s name , the Israelites would serve as witnesses to his sovereignty before the nations . 
 They were to be a people ‘ created for Jehovah’s glory . ’ 
 They were to ‘ recount the praise of Jehovah , ’ relate his wondrous acts of deliverance and thus glorify his holy name . 
 In short , they were to be a nation of witnesses for Jehovah . 
 In what respects was Israel a dedicated nation ? 
 In the 11th century B.C.E . , King Solomon indicated that Jehovah had made Israel a separated nation . 
 In prayer to Jehovah , he stated : “ You yourself separated them as your inheritance out of all the peoples of the earth . ” 
 Individual Israelites also had a special relationship with Jehovah . 
 Earlier , Moses had told them : “ Sons you are of Jehovah your God . . . . 
 For you are a holy people to Jehovah your God . ” 
 Young Israelites , therefore , did not need to dedicate their lives to Jehovah . 
 They were born as members of God’s dedicated people . 
 Each new generation was instructed in the laws of Jehovah and was obligated to keep them by virtue of the covenant that bound Israel to Jehovah . ​ — Deuteronomy 11 : 18 , 19 . 
 Free to Choose 
 What choice did individual Israelites have to make ? 
 Although the Israelites were born into a dedicated nation , each individual had to make a personal decision to serve God . 
 Before they entered the Promised Land , Moses told them : “ I do take the heavens and the earth as witnesses against you today , that I have put life and death before you , the blessing and the malediction ; and you must choose life in order that you may keep alive , you and your offspring , by loving Jehovah your God , by listening to his voice and by sticking to him ; for he is your life and the length of your days , that you may dwell upon the ground that Jehovah swore to your forefathers Abraham , Isaac and Jacob to give to them . ” 
 Hence , the Israelites individually had to choose to love Jehovah , to listen to his voice , and to stick to him . 
 Since the Israelites had free will , they would have to bear the consequences of their choice . ​ — Deuteronomy 30 : 16 - 18 . 
 What happened after the death of Joshua’s generation ? 
 The period of the Judges provides a good illustration of the consequences of faithfulness and of unfaithfulness . 
 Just before that period began , the Israelites followed the good example of Joshua and were blessed . 
 “ The people continued to serve Jehovah all the days of Joshua and all the days of the older men who extended their days after Joshua and who had seen all of Jehovah’s great work that he did for Israel . ” 
 However , some time after Joshua’s death , “ another generation began to rise after them that did not know Jehovah or the work that he had done for Israel . 
 And the sons of Israel fell to doing what was bad in the eyes of Jehovah . ” 
 Apparently , the upcoming , inexperienced generation did not prize their heritage as members of a dedicated people , in whose behalf their God , Jehovah , had accomplished mighty acts in the past . ​ — Psalm 78 : 3 - 7 , 10 , 11 . 
 Living Up to Their Dedication 
 8 , 9 . ( a ) What arrangement allowed the Israelites to demonstrate their dedication to Jehovah ? 
 ( b ) What did those who made voluntary offerings gain for themselves ? 
 Jehovah provided his people with opportunities to live up to the national dedication . 
 For instance , his Law provided for a system of sacrifices , or offerings , some of which were compulsory , while others were voluntary . 
 Such sacrifices included burnt offerings , grain offerings , and communion offerings that were voluntary ​ — gifts presented to Jehovah to gain his favor and express thanksgiving . ​ — Leviticus 7 : 11 - 13 . 
 Those voluntary sacrifices pleased Jehovah . 
 It was said of the burnt offering and of the grain offering that they were “ a restful odor to Jehovah . ” 
 In the communion sacrifice , the blood and the fat of the animal were offered to Jehovah , while portions of the meat were consumed by the priests and the offerer . 
 It was thus a symbolic meal signifying a peaceful relationship with Jehovah . 
 The Law stated : “ Now in case you should sacrifice a communion sacrifice to Jehovah , you should sacrifice it to gain approval for yourselves . ” 
 While all Israelites were dedicated to Jehovah by reason of birth , those who made their dedication meaningful by making voluntary offerings ‘ gained approval for themselves ’ and were richly blessed . ​ — Malachi 3 : 10 . 
 How did Jehovah express his displeasure in the days of Isaiah and of Malachi ? 
 Frequently , however , the dedicated nation of Israel proved unfaithful to Jehovah . 
 Through his prophet Isaiah , Jehovah said to them : “ You have not brought me the sheep of your whole burnt offerings , and with your sacrifices you have not glorified me . 
 I have not compelled you to serve me with a gift . ” 
 In addition , offerings that were not made willingly and out of love had no value in Jehovah’s eyes . 
 For instance , three centuries after Isaiah , in the days of the prophet Malachi , the Israelites offered blemished animals . 
 Hence , Malachi told them : “ ‘ No delight do I have in you , ’ Jehovah of armies has said , ‘ and in the gift offering from your hand I take no pleasure . ’ . . . 
 ‘ You have brought something torn away , and the lame one , and the sick one ; yes , you have brought it as a gift . 
 Can I take pleasure in it at your hand ? ’ 
 Jehovah has said . ” ​ — Malachi 1 : 10 , 13 ; Amos 5 : 22 . 
 Rejected as a Dedicated Nation 
 What opportunity was given to Israel ? 
 At the time the Israelites became a nation dedicated to Jehovah , he promised them : “ If you will strictly obey my voice and will indeed keep my covenant , then you will certainly become my special property out of all other peoples , because the whole earth belongs to me . 
 And you yourselves will become to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation . ” 
 The promised Messiah would appear in their midst and give them the first opportunity to become members of God’s Kingdom government . 
 But the great majority of the Israelite nation proved false to their dedication . 
 They rejected the Messiah and eventually killed him . ​ — Acts 7 : 51 - 53 . 
 What statements by Jesus show that Israel was rejected as Jehovah’s dedicated nation ? 
 A few days before his death , Jesus told the Jewish religious leaders : “ Did you never read in the Scriptures , ‘ The stone that the builders rejected is the one that has become the chief cornerstone . 
 From Jehovah this has come to be , and it is marvelous in our eyes ’ ? 
 This is why I say to you , The kingdom of God will be taken from you and be given to a nation producing its fruits . ” 
 Showing that Jehovah had rejected them as a nation dedicated to Him , Jesus stated : “ Jerusalem , Jerusalem , the killer of the prophets and stoner of those sent forth to her , ​ — how often I wanted to gather your children together , the way a hen gathers her chicks together under her wings ! 
 But you people did not want it . 
 Look ! 
 Your house is abandoned to you . ” ​ — Matthew 23 : 37 , 38 . 
 A New Dedicated Nation 
 What prophetic statement did Jehovah make in the days of Jeremiah ? 
 At the time of the prophet Jeremiah , Jehovah foretold something new with regard to his people . 
 We read : “ ‘ Look ! 
 There are days coming , ’ is the utterance of Jehovah , ‘ and I will conclude with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new covenant ; not one like the covenant that I concluded with their forefathers in the day of my taking hold of their hand to bring them forth out of the land of Egypt , “ which covenant of mine they themselves broke , although I myself had husbandly ownership of them , ” is the utterance of Jehovah . ’ 
 ‘ For this is the covenant that I shall conclude with the house of Israel after those days , ’ is the utterance of Jehovah . 
 ‘ I will put my law within them , and in their heart I shall write it . 
 And I will become their God , and they themselves will become my people . ’ ” ​ — Jeremiah 31 : 31 - 33 . 
 When and on what basis did Jehovah’s new dedicated nation come into being ? 
 Identify that new nation . 
 The basis for this new covenant was laid when Jesus died and later presented the value of his shed blood to his Father , in 33 C.E . 
 However , with the outpouring of the holy spirit at Pentecost 33 C.E . and the birth of a new nation , “ the Israel of God , ” the new covenant went into operation . 
 Writing to anointed Christians , the apostle Peter declared : “ You are ‘ a chosen race , a royal priesthood , a holy nation , a people for special possession , that you should declare abroad the excellencies ’ of the one that called you out of darkness into his wonderful light . 
 For you were once not a people , but are now God’s people . ” 
 The special relationship between Jehovah and fleshly Israel had ended . 
 In 33 C.E . , Jehovah’s favor had been transferred from earthly Israel to spiritual Israel , the Christian congregation , ‘ a nation producing the fruits ’ of the Messianic Kingdom . ​ — Matthew 21 : 43 . 
 Individual Dedication 
 On the day of Pentecost 33 C.E . , what baptism did Peter urge his listeners to undergo ? 
 After Pentecost 33 C.E . , every individual , Jew or Gentile , had to make a personal dedication to God and be baptized “ in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit . ” 
 * At Pentecost , the apostle Peter told receptive Jews and proselytes : “ Repent , and let each one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for forgiveness of your sins , and you will receive the free gift of the holy spirit . ” 
 Such Jews and proselytes had to signify by their baptism not only that they had dedicated their lives to Jehovah but also that they had accepted Jesus as the means whereby Jehovah would forgive their sins . 
 They had to acknowledge him as Jehovah’s High Priest and as their Leader , the Head of the Christian congregation . ​ — Colossians 1 : 13 , 14 , 18 . 
 In Paul’s day , how did rightly disposed ones ​ — Jews and Gentiles — ​ become part of spiritual Israel ? 
 Years later , the apostle Paul stated : “ Both to those in Damascus first and to those in Jerusalem , and over all the country of Judea , and to the nations I went bringing the message that they should repent and turn to God by doing works that befit repentance . ” 
 After convincing people ​ — Jews and Gentiles — ​ that Jesus was Christ , the Messiah , Paul helped them to dedication and baptism . 
 By turning to God , such new disciples became members of spiritual Israel . 
 What sealing work is nearing its end , and what other work is going on apace ? 
 Today , the final sealing of the remaining spiritual Israelites is near . 
 When it is completed , the “ four angels ” holding back the winds of destruction of “ the great tribulation ” will be authorized to release them . 
 In the meantime , the ingathering of the “ great crowd , ” who hope to live forever on earth , is going on apace . 
 These “ other sheep ” freely choose to exercise faith in “ the blood of the Lamb ” and get baptized in symbol of their dedication to Jehovah . 
 Among them are many young ones who have been raised by Christian parents . 
 If you are such a young person , you will be interested in reading the following article . 
 [ Footnote ] 
 See The Watchtower , May 15 , 2003 , pages 30 - 1 . 
 By Way of Review 
 • Why did young Israelites not have to make a personal dedication to Jehovah ? 
 • How could the Israelites demonstrate that they lived up to their dedication ? 
 • Why did Jehovah reject Israel as his dedicated nation , and how was it replaced ? 
 • From Pentecost 33 C.E . on , what did both Jews and Gentiles have to do to become members of spiritual Israel ? 
 [ Picture on page 21 ] 
 Young Israelites were born as members of God’s chosen nation 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 Each Israelite had to make a personal decision to serve God 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 Voluntary offerings gave Israelites the opportunity to demonstrate their love for Jehovah 
 [ Picture on page 25 ] 
 After Pentecost 33 C.E . , Christ’s followers had to make a personal dedication to God and symbolize this by baptism 
 Youths , Make It Your Choice to Serve Jehovah 
 “ Choose for yourselves today whom you will serve . ” ​ — JOSHUA 24 : 15 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What wrong kinds of baptism have been practiced in Christendom ? 
 “ LET [ children ] become Christians when they have become able to know Christ . ” 
 A writer named Tertullian penned those words at the close of the second century C.E . 
 He was protesting infant baptism , a practice that was taking root in the apostate Christianity of his day . 
 In disagreement with Tertullian and the Bible , Church Father Augustine claimed that baptism removes the stain of original sin and that infants who die unbaptized are damned . 
 That belief promoted the practice of baptizing babies as quickly as possible after they were born . 
 Many mainstream churches of Christendom still baptize newborn babies . 
 Moreover , throughout history , compulsory baptism of conquered “ pagans ” was practiced by rulers and religious leaders of so - called Christian nations . 
 But infant baptism and forced baptisms of adults have no foundation in the Bible . 
 No Automatic Dedication Today 
 3 , 4 . 
 What can help children of dedicated parents to make a voluntary dedication ? 
 The Bible shows that God considers young children to be holy even if only one of their parents is a faithful Christian . 
 Does that make such children dedicated servants of Jehovah ? 
 No . 
 However , children who are raised by parents who are dedicated to Jehovah receive training that can lead those children to make a voluntary dedication to Jehovah . 
 Wise King Solomon wrote : “ Observe , O my son , the commandment of your father , and do not forsake the law of your mother . . . . 
 When you walk about , it will lead you ; when you lie down , it will stand guard over you ; and when you have waked up , it itself will make you its concern . 
 For the commandment is a lamp , and a light the law is , and the reproofs of discipline are the way of life . ” ​ — Proverbs 6 : 20 - 23 . 
 The guidance of Christian parents can be a protection for youngsters , provided they are willing to follow it . 
 Solomon also stated : “ A wise son is the one that makes a father rejoice , and a stupid son is the grief of his mother . ” 
 “ You , O my son , hear and become wise , and lead your heart on in the way . ” 
 Yes , to benefit from parental training , you young ones must willingly accept advice , counsel , and discipline . 
 You are not born wise , but you can “ become wise ” and voluntarily follow “ the way of life . ” 
 What Is Mental - Regulating ? 
 What counsel did Paul give to children and to fathers ? 
 The apostle Paul wrote : “ Children , be obedient to your parents in union with the Lord , for this is righteous : ‘ Honor your father and your mother ’ ; which is the first command with a promise : ‘ That it may go well with you and you may endure a long time on the earth . ’ 
 And you , fathers , do not be irritating your children , but go on bringing them up in the discipline and mental - regulating of Jehovah . ” ​ — Ephesians 6 : 1 - 4 . 
 6 , 7 . 
 What is involved in bringing up children in the “ mental - regulating of Jehovah , ” and why does this not mean that parents are unfairly influencing their children ? 
 Are Christian parents unfairly influencing their children when they raise them in “ the discipline and mental - regulating of Jehovah ” ? 
 No . 
 Who can criticize parents for teaching their children what they consider to be right and morally beneficial ? 
 Atheists are not criticized for teaching their children that God does not exist . 
 Roman Catholics feel duty - bound to bring up their children in the Catholic faith , and they are rarely criticized for endeavoring to do so . 
 Similarly , Jehovah’s Witnesses should not be accused of manipulating the minds of their children when they raise them to adopt Jehovah’s thinking on basic truths and moral principles . 
 According to the Theological Dictionary of the New Testament , the original Greek word translated “ mental - regulating ” at Ephesians 6 : 4 refers to a process that “ seeks to correct the mind , to put right what is wrong , to improve the spiritual attitude . ” 
 What if a young person resists parental training because of peer pressure , the desire to go along with the crowd ? 
 Who can be said to exert harmful pressure ​ — the parents or the young person’s peers ? 
 If the latter are pressuring the youngster to take drugs , drink heavily , or engage in immoral conduct , should the parents be criticized for trying to adjust their child’s thinking and help him or her realize the consequences of such dangerous conduct ? 
 What was involved in Timothy’s being “ persuaded to believe ” ? 
 The apostle Paul wrote to the young man Timothy : “ Continue in the things that you learned and were persuaded to believe , knowing from what persons you learned them and that from infancy you have known the holy writings , which are able to make you wise for salvation through the faith in connection with Christ Jesus . ” 
 From Timothy’s early childhood , his mother and grandmother had firmly grounded his faith in God on knowledge of the Holy Scriptures . 
 Later , when they became Christians , they did not force Timothy to believe but “ persuaded ” him by means of sound reasoning based on Scriptural knowledge . 
 Jehovah Invites You to Choose 
 ( a ) How did Jehovah dignify his creatures , and for what reason ? 
 ( b ) How did God’s only - begotten Son exercise his free will ? 
 Jehovah could have made his creatures robots , programmed to do his will and unable to do otherwise . 
 Instead , he dignified them with free will . 
 Our God desires willing subjects . 
 He takes delight in seeing his creatures , old and young , serve him out of love . 
 The finest example of loving submission to God’s will is his only - begotten Son , of whom Jehovah stated : “ This is my Son , the beloved , whom I have approved . ” 
 This firstborn Son said to his Father : “ To do your will , O my God , I have delighted , and your law is within my inward parts . ” ​ — Psalm 40 : 8 ; Hebrews 10 : 9 , 10 . 
 What is the basis for serving Jehovah acceptably ? 
 Jehovah expects those who serve him under the direction of his Son to show the same willing submission to His will . 
 Prophetically , the psalmist sang : “ Your people will offer themselves willingly on the day of your military force . 
 In the splendors of holiness , from the womb of the dawn , you have your company of young men just like dewdrops . ” 
 Jehovah’s entire organization , both the heavenly and the earthly parts , functions on the basis of loving submission to God’s will . 
 What choice is placed before young ones raised by dedicated parents ? 
 So you young ones should understand that neither your parents nor the Christian elders in the congregation are going to force you to get baptized . 
 The desire to serve Jehovah must come from you . 
 Joshua of old told the Israelites : “ Serve [ Jehovah ] in faultlessness and in truth . . . 
 Choose for yourselves today whom you will serve . ” 
 Similarly , it must be of your own accord that you choose to dedicate yourselves to Jehovah and devote your lives to doing his will . 
 Facing Up to Your Responsibility 
 ( a ) While parents can train their children , what can they not do for them ? 
 ( b ) When does a young person become responsible before Jehovah for the choices he makes ? 
 The time comes when you young people are no longer protected by the faithfulness of your parents . 
 The disciple James wrote : “ If one knows how to do what is right and yet does not do it , it is a sin for him . ” 
 Parents cannot serve God for their children any more than children can serve God for their parents . 
 Have you learned about Jehovah and his purposes ? 
 Are you old enough to understand what you have learned and to begin to have a personal relationship with him ? 
 Would it not then be reasonable to think that God considers you capable of deciding to serve him ? 
 What questions would unbaptized adolescents do well to ask themselves ? 
 Are you an unbaptized young person who is being raised by godly parents , attending Christian meetings , and even sharing in the preaching of the Kingdom good news ? 
 If so , ask yourself honestly : ‘ Why am I doing this ? 
 Do I attend meetings and share in the preaching work because my parents expect me to do so or because I want to please Jehovah ? ’ 
 Have you proved to yourself “ the good and acceptable and perfect will of God ” ? ​ — Romans 12 : 2 . 
 Why Put Off Getting Baptized ? 
 What Biblical examples show that baptism should not be unduly delayed ? 
 “ What prevents me from getting baptized ? ” 
 The Ethiopian man who put that question to the evangelizer Philip had just learned that Jesus was the Messiah . 
 But the Ethiopian had sufficient knowledge of the Scriptures to realize that he should not delay in openly testifying that from then on he would serve Jehovah as part of the Christian congregation , and that brought him much joy . 
 Similarly , a woman named Lydia , whose heart was opened “ wide to pay attention to the things being spoken by Paul , ” immediately “ got baptized , ” she and her household . 
 Likewise , the jailer in Philippi listened to Paul and Silas as they “ spoke the word of Jehovah to him , ” and “ he and his were baptized without delay . ” 
 Therefore , if you have a basic knowledge of Jehovah and his purposes , a sincere desire to do his will , and a good reputation in the congregation and you are faithfully attending meetings and sharing in preaching the good news of the Kingdom , why would you put off getting baptized ? ​ — Matthew 28 : 19 , 20 . 
 15 , 16 . ( a ) What incorrect reasoning may hold some young ones back from getting baptized ? 
 ( b ) How can dedication and baptism serve as a protection for young ones ? 
 Could it be that you hesitate to take this important step for fear of being held accountable should you fall into wrong conduct ? 
 If so , think of this : Would you refuse to apply for a driver’s license simply because you were afraid that some day you might have an accident ? 
 Of course not ! 
 Neither should you hesitate to get baptized if you qualify . 
 Indeed , you will be strongly motivated to do your utmost to resist wrongdoing if you have dedicated your life to Jehovah and have agreed to do his will . 
 Young ones , please do not imagine that by postponing baptism , you avoid accountability . 
 When you have reached the age of responsibility , you are answerable to Jehovah for the way you act whether you are baptized or not . ​ — Romans 14 : 11 , 12 . 
 Numerous Witnesses around the world feel that their decision to get baptized when they were young helped them greatly . 
 Take as an example a 23 - year - old Witness in Western Europe . 
 He recalls that getting baptized at the age of 13 motivated him to be careful not to be swept away by “ the desires incidental to youth . ” 
 Early on , he set his sights on serving as a full - time minister . 
 Today , he serves happily at a branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 Rich blessings await all youths , including you , who choose to serve Jehovah . 
 In what areas is it necessary to go on perceiving what “ the will of Jehovah ” is ? 
 Dedication and baptism mark the beginning of a life wherein we take Jehovah’s will into account in every sphere of activity . 
 Fulfilling our dedication involves ‘ buying out time . ’ 
 How do we do that ? 
 By taking time that we would otherwise spend in futile pursuits and devoting it to serious Bible study , regular meeting attendance , and the fullest possible share in preaching the “ good news of the kingdom . ” 
 Our dedication to Jehovah and our desire to do his will affect for the good all aspects of our lives , including the way we relax , our eating and drinking habits , and the kind of music we listen to . 
 Why not choose the type of relaxation that you will be able to enjoy throughout eternity ? 
 Many thousands of happy young Witnesses will tell you that there are many healthy ways of having fun while staying within the bounds of “ the will of Jehovah . ” ​ — Ephesians 5 : 17 - 19 . 
 “ We Will Go With You ” 
 What question should young ones ask themselves ? 
 From 1513 B.C.E . to Pentecost 33 C.E . , Jehovah had on earth an organized people whom he had chosen to practice his worship and be his witnesses . 
 Young Israelites were born into that nation . 
 Since Pentecost , Jehovah has a new “ nation ” on earth , spiritual Israel , “ a people for his name . ” 
 The apostle Paul states that Christ has cleansed for himself “ a people peculiarly his own , zealous for fine works . ” 
 You young people are free to determine for yourselves where that people is to be found . 
 Who today make up “ the righteous nation that is keeping faithful conduct , ” living in harmony with Bible principles , acting as faithful Witnesses for Jehovah , and proclaiming his Kingdom as the only hope for humanity ? 
 Look at the churches of Christendom and other religions , and compare their conduct with what the Bible requires of the true servants of God . 
 Of what have millions of people throughout the earth become convinced ? 
 Millions of people throughout the world , including many young ones , have become convinced that the anointed remnant of Jehovah’s Witnesses constitute that “ righteous nation . ” 
 They say to these spiritual Israelites : “ We will go with you people , for we have heard that God is with you people . ” 
 We truly hope and pray that you young ones will decide to take your place among God’s people and thus “ choose life ” ​ — life everlasting in Jehovah’s new world . ​ — Deuteronomy 30 : 15 - 20 ; 2 Peter 3 : 11 - 13 . 
 By Way of Review 
 • What is involved in mental - regulating ? 
 • What kind of service is acceptable to Jehovah ? 
 • What choice is placed before all young ones raised by dedicated parents ? 
 • Why should baptism not be unduly postponed ? 
 [ Pictures on page 26 ] 
 To whom will you listen ? 
 [ Picture on page 28 ] 
 How can dedication and baptism serve as a protection for you ? 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 What prevents you from getting baptized ? 
 ‘ Keep Free From Murmurings ’ 
 “ Keep doing all things free from murmurings . ” ​ — PHILIPPIANS 2 : 14 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What counsel did the apostle Paul give Christians in Philippi and Corinth , and why ? 
 IN HIS divinely inspired letter to the first - century Christian congregation in Philippi , the apostle Paul gave much commendation . 
 He commended his fellow believers in that city for their generous and zealous spirit , and he expressed joy over their good works . 
 Nevertheless , Paul reminded them to “ keep doing all things free from murmurings . ” 
 Why did the apostle give this admonition ? 
 Paul knew what murmuring can lead to . 
 A few years earlier , he had reminded the congregation in Corinth that it can be dangerous to murmur . 
 Paul pointed out that while the Israelites were in the wilderness , they had repeatedly aroused Jehovah’s anger . 
 How ? 
 By desiring injurious things , by practicing idolatry and fornication , by putting Jehovah to the test , and by murmuring . 
 Paul encouraged the Corinthians to learn from these examples . 
 He wrote : “ Neither be murmurers , just as some of them murmured , only to perish by the destroyer . ” ​ — 1 Corinthians 10 : 6 - 11 . 
 Why is the subject of murmuring of interest today ? 
 As Jehovah’s present - day servants , we manifest a spirit similar to that of the congregation in Philippi . 
 We are zealous for fine works , and we have love among ourselves . 
 In view of the injury that murmuring caused among God’s people in the past , however , we have good reason to take to heart the counsel : “ Keep doing all things free from murmurings . ” 
 Let us first consider examples of murmuring mentioned in the Scriptures . 
 Then we will discuss some things we can do to prevent murmuring from causing injury today . 
 An Evil Assembly Murmurs Against Jehovah 
 In what way did the Israelites murmur in the wilderness ? 
 The Hebrew word meaning ‘ to murmur , grumble , complain , or growl ’ is used in the Bible in connection with events during Israel’s 40 years in the wilderness . 
 On occasion , the Israelites were discontented with their lot in life and expressed this by murmuring . 
 For example , just a few weeks after their deliverance from slavery in Egypt , “ the entire assembly of the sons of Israel began to murmur against Moses and Aaron . ” 
 The Israelites complained about food , saying : “ If only we had died by Jehovah’s hand in the land of Egypt while we were sitting by the pots of meat , while we were eating bread to satisfaction , because you have brought us out into this wilderness to put this whole congregation to death by famine . ” ​ — Exodus 16 : 1 - 3 . 
 When the Israelites complained , against whom was their murmuring really directed ? 
 Actually , Jehovah sustained the Israelites with what they needed in the wilderness , lovingly providing them with food and water . 
 There was never a threat that the people of Israel would die of famine in the wilderness . 
 In a spirit of discontent , though , they exaggerated their plight and began to murmur . 
 Although their complaints were directed against Moses and Aaron , in Jehovah’s eyes the real target of their discontent was God himself . 
 Moses told the Israelites : “ Jehovah has heard your murmurings that you are murmuring against him . 
 And what are we ? 
 Your murmurings are not against us , but against Jehovah . ” ​ — Exodus 16 : 4 - 8 . 
 6 , 7 . 
 As shown at Numbers 14 : 1 - 3 , how had the attitude of the Israelites changed ? 
 Not long thereafter , the Israelites murmured once again . 
 Moses sent 12 men to spy out the Promised Land . 
 Ten of them returned with a bad report . 
 The result ? 
 “ All the sons of Israel began to murmur against Moses and Aaron , and all the assembly began to say against them : ‘ If only we had died in the land of Egypt , or if only we had died in this wilderness ! 
 And why is Jehovah bringing us to this land [ Canaan ] to fall by the sword ? 
 Our wives and our little ones will become plunder . 
 Is it not better for us to return to Egypt ? ’ ” ​ — Numbers 14 : 1 - 3 . 
 How Israel’s spirit had changed ! 
 Initial gratitude for their release from Egypt and deliverance through the Red Sea had moved them to sing praises to Jehovah . 
 Faced with the discomforts of the wilderness and fearful of the Canaanites , however , the gratitude of God’s people was replaced by a spirit of discontent . 
 Instead of thanking God for their freedom , they blamed him for what they wrongly viewed as deprivation . 
 Murmuring was thus an expression of lack of proper appreciation for Jehovah’s provisions . 
 No wonder he said : “ How long will this evil assembly have this murmuring that they are carrying on against me ? ” ​ — Numbers 14 : 27 ; 21 : 5 . 
 Murmuring in the First Century 
 8 , 9 . 
 Cite examples of murmuring recorded in the Christian Greek Scriptures . 
 The foregoing examples of murmuring involved groups of people apparently expressing their discontent out loud . 
 When Jesus Christ was in Jerusalem for the Festival of Booths in 32 C.E . , however , “ there was a lot of subdued talk about him among the crowds . ” 
 They were whispering about him , some saying that he was a good man , others saying that he was not . 
 On another occasion , Jesus and his disciples were guests at the home of Levi , or Matthew , the tax collector . 
 “ The Pharisees and their scribes began murmuring to his disciples , saying : ‘ Why is it you eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners ? ’ ” 
 In Galilee some time later , “ the Jews began to murmur at [ Jesus ] because he said : ‘ I am the bread that came down from heaven . ’ ” 
 Even some of Jesus ’ followers took offense at what he said and began to murmur . ​ — John 6 : 41 , 60 , 61 . 
 10 , 11 . 
 Why did the Greek - speaking Jews murmur , and how can Christian elders benefit from the way that the complaint was handled ? 
 The outcome was more positive in a case of murmuring that occurred shortly after Pentecost 33 C.E . 
 Many newly converted disciples from outside Israel were then enjoying the hospitality of fellow believers in Judaea , but problems arose in connection with sharing what was available . 
 The account states : “ A murmuring arose on the part of the Greek - speaking Jews against the Hebrew - speaking Jews , because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution . ” ​ — Acts 6 : 1 . 
 These murmurers were not like the Israelites in the wilderness . 
 The Greek - speaking Jews did not selfishly express discontent about their own lot in life . 
 They drew attention to a failure to meet the needs of some of the widows . 
 Moreover , the murmurers did not act as troublemakers and raise their voices against Jehovah . 
 They directed their complaint to the apostles , who arranged for prompt action to be taken because the complaint was justified . 
 What a good example the apostles set for Christian elders today ! 
 These spiritual shepherds are careful not to ‘ stop up their ears from the complaining cry of the lowly one . ’ ​ — Proverbs 21 : 13 ; Acts 6 : 2 - 6 . 
 Beware of the Corrosive Influence of Murmuring 
 12 , 13 . ( a ) Illustrate the effects of murmuring . ( b ) What might prompt an individual to murmur ? 
 Most of the Scriptural examples we have considered show that murmuring caused much damage among God’s people in the past . 
 Therefore , we do well to think seriously about the corrosive influence it could have today . 
 An illustration might help . 
 Many types of metal have a natural tendency to rust . 
 If early signs of rust are ignored , metal can rust to the point that it can no longer serve its purpose . 
 Countless automobiles are scrapped , not because of mechanical failure , but because the metal is so rusted that the vehicles are unsafe . 
 How can we apply this illustration to murmuring ? 
 Just as certain metals tend to rust , imperfect humans have a tendency to complain . 
 We should be on guard to detect any sign of this . 
 Even as moisture and salty air accelerate rusting , adversity makes us more inclined to murmur . 
 Stress can turn a minor irritation into a major grievance . 
 As conditions in the last days of this system deteriorate , potential causes of complaint will likely increase . 
 Hence , one servant of Jehovah might begin to murmur against another . 
 The cause could be a small issue , such as discontent with someone’s weaknesses , abilities , or privileges of service . 
 14 , 15 . 
 Why should we not allow a tendency to complain to go unchecked ? 
 Whatever the reason for our displeasure , if we were to allow a tendency to complain to go unchecked , it could promote in us a spirit of discontent and make us habitual murmurers . 
 Yes , the spiritually corrosive effect of murmuring could corrupt us completely . 
 When the Israelites murmured about life in the wilderness , they went so far as to blame Jehovah . 
 May that never happen to us ! 
 The tendency of metal to rust can be reduced by coating it with rustproof paint and quickly treating isolated spots of corrosion . 
 In a similar fashion , if we detect in ourselves a tendency to complain , this can be kept under control if we give the matter prompt , prayerful attention . 
 How ? 
 Look at Things From Jehovah’s Point of View 
 How can a tendency to complain be overcome ? 
 Murmuring focuses our mind on ourselves and our troubles and pushes into the background the blessings we enjoy as Witnesses of Jehovah . 
 To overcome a tendency to complain , we need to keep these blessings uppermost in our mind . 
 For instance , each of us has the wonderful privilege of bearing the personal name of Jehovah . 
 We can cultivate a close relationship with him , and we are able to speak to the “ Hearer of prayer ” at any time . 
 Our life has real meaning because we understand the issue of universal sovereignty and remember that it is our privilege to maintain integrity to God . 
 We can have a regular share in preaching the good news of the Kingdom . 
 Faith in the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ enables us to have a clean conscience . 
 These are blessings we enjoy no matter what we have to endure . 
 Why should we try to view matters from Jehovah’s point of view , even if we have a valid reason for complaint ? 
 Let us try to see things from Jehovah’s point of view , not just our own . 
 “ Make me know your own ways , O Jehovah ; teach me your own paths , ” sang the psalmist David . 
 If we have a valid reason for complaint , this has not escaped Jehovah’s notice . 
 He could correct the matter immediately . 
 So why does he at times allow adversity to continue ? 
 This could be in order to help us develop fine qualities , such as patience , endurance , faith , and long - suffering . ​ — James 1 : 2 - 4 . 
 18 , 19 . 
 Illustrate the possible effects of our putting up with inconveniences without complaining . 
 Our putting up with inconveniences without complaining not only helps us to improve our personality but may also impress those observing our conduct . 
 In 2003 a group of Jehovah’s Witnesses traveled by bus from Germany to attend a convention in Hungary . 
 The bus driver was not a Witness , and he had reservations about being with the Witnesses for ten days . 
 By the end of the trip , however , he had changed his mind completely . 
 Why ? 
 During the trip , several things went wrong . 
 But the Witnesses never complained . 
 The driver said that this was the best group of passengers he had ever had ! 
 In fact , he promised that the next time the Witnesses called at his home , he would invite them in and carefully listen to them . 
 What a fine impression the passengers made by “ doing all things free from murmurings ” ! 
 Forgiveness Promotes Unity 
 Why should we forgive one another ? 
 What if we have a complaint against a fellow believer ? 
 If the matter is serious , we should apply the principles found in what Jesus said as recorded at Matthew 18 : 15 - 17 . 
 This will not always be necessary , though , since most grievances are minor . 
 Why not see the situation as a chance to practice forgiveness ? 
 Paul wrote : “ Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely if anyone has a cause for complaint against another . 
 Even as Jehovah freely forgave you , so do you also . 
 But , besides all these things , clothe yourselves with love , for it is a perfect bond of union . ” 
 Can we find room in our heart to forgive ? 
 Does not Jehovah have reason to complain about us ? 
 Yet , he repeatedly shows compassion and forgiveness . 
 How might those listening to murmuring be affected ? 
 Whatever the grievance may be , murmuring will not resolve matters . 
 The Hebrew term meaning “ to murmur ” can also mean “ to growl . ” 
 Very likely , we feel uncomfortable around a constant murmurer and try to distance ourselves from him . 
 If we were to murmur , or growl , those listening might feel the same way . 
 Why , they may be so uncomfortable that they want to distance themselves from us ! 
 Growling might capture someone’s attention , but it will certainly not win anyone’s heart . 
 What did one girl say about Jehovah’s Witnesses ? 
 A forgiving attitude promotes unity ​ — something cherished by Jehovah’s people . 
 In one European land , a 17 - year - old Catholic girl wrote to the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses to express her admiration for them . 
 She said : “ It is the only organization I know where the members are not divided by hatred , greed , intolerance , selfishness , or disunity . ” 
 What will we discuss in the next article ? 
 Appreciation for all the spiritual blessings we receive as worshippers of the true God , Jehovah , will help us to promote unity and avoid murmuring against others in personal matters . 
 The next article will show how godly qualities will prevent us from engaging in an even more dangerous form of murmuring ​ — that is , murmuring against the earthly part of Jehovah’s organization . 
 Do You Recall ? 
 • What is involved in murmuring ? 
 • How might the effects of murmuring be illustrated ? 
 • What can help us overcome a tendency to murmur ? 
 • How can willingness to forgive help us to refrain from murmuring ? 
 [ Picture on page 14 ] 
 The Israelites actually murmured against Jehovah ! 
 [ Picture on page 17 ] 
 Do you try to look at things as Jehovah does ? 
 [ Pictures on page 18 ] 
 Forgiveness promotes Christian unity 
 Focus on the Goodness of Jehovah’s Organization 
 “ We will certainly be satisfied with the goodness of your house . ” ​ — PSALM 65 : 4 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) The arrangements in connection with the temple would have what effect on God’s people ? 
 ( b ) What provisions did David make for the temple’s construction ? 
 DAVID of ancient Israel is one of the most outstanding people discussed in the Hebrew Scriptures . 
 This shepherd , musician , prophet , and king placed implicit trust in Jehovah God . 
 David’s deep personal attachment to Jehovah aroused in him a desire to build a house for God . 
 Such a house , or temple , would become the center of true worship in Israel . 
 David knew that the arrangements in connection with the temple would bring joy and blessings to God’s people . 
 David therefore sang : “ Happy is the one you [ Jehovah ] choose and cause to approach , that he may reside in your courtyards . 
 We will certainly be satisfied with the goodness of your house , the holy place of your temple . ” ​ — Psalm 65 : 4 . 
 David was not permitted to supervise the construction of Jehovah’s house . 
 Instead , that privilege was reserved for his son Solomon . 
 David did not murmur because someone else was granted the privilege that he himself so earnestly desired . 
 What was most important to him was that the temple be built . 
 He wholeheartedly supported the project by passing on to Solomon the architectural plans that he had received from Jehovah . 
 Moreover , David organized thousands of Levites into divisions of service and donated a large amount of gold and silver for temple construction . ​ — 1 Chronicles 17 : 1 , 4 , 11 , 12 ; 23 : 3 - 6 ; 28 : 11 , 12 ; 29 : 1 - 5 . 
 What attitude do God’s servants have toward arrangements for true worship ? 
 Faithful Israelites supported the arrangements made for true worship at the house of God . 
 As present - day servants of Jehovah , we similarly support provisions for worship within the earthly part of Jehovah’s organization . 
 We thereby demonstrate that we have the same frame of mind that David had . 
 Ours is not a spirit of complaint . 
 Instead , we focus on the goodness of God’s organization . 
 Have you thought about the many good things for which we can truly be grateful ? 
 Let us consider some of them . 
 Grateful for Those Taking the Lead 
 4 , 5 . ( a ) How does “ the faithful and discreet slave ” fulfill its commission ? 
 ( b ) How have some Witnesses felt about the spiritual food they receive ? 
 We have sound reasons to be grateful for “ the faithful and discreet slave ” appointed by Jesus Christ over his belongings on earth . 
 The slave class of spirit - anointed Christians takes the lead in preaching the good news , arranges meetings for worship , and publishes Bible - based literature in over 400 languages . 
 Millions of people earth wide gratefully partake of this spiritual “ food at the proper time . ” 
 There certainly is no reason to murmur about it . 
 For many years , an elderly Witness of Jehovah named Elfi has experienced comfort and support by taking to heart the Scriptural counsel found in publications of the slave class . 
 Deep appreciation moved Elfi to write : “ What would I do without Jehovah’s organization ? ” 
 Peter and Irmgard have also been God’s servants for decades . 
 Irmgard expresses gratitude for all the provisions made by “ Jehovah’s loving and caring organization . ” 
 These publications include those designed for people with special needs , such as individuals with impaired vision or hearing . 
 6 , 7 . ( a ) How are the activities of congregations earth wide supervised ? 
 ( b ) What has been said about the earthly part of Jehovah’s organization ? 
 The ‘ faithful slave ’ is represented by the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses , a small group of spirit - anointed men serving at the world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Brooklyn , New York . 
 The Governing Body appoints experienced servants of Jehovah to serve at branch offices that supervise the activities of over 98,000 congregations earth wide . 
 Men who meet the Biblical requirements are appointed as elders and ministerial servants in these congregations . 
 The elders take the lead and lovingly shepherd the flock of God in their care . 
 What a blessing it is to be part of that flock and to experience the love and unity that exist among “ the whole association of brothers ” ! ​ — 1 Peter 2 : 17 ; 5 : 2 , 3 . 
 Far from registering complaints , individuals often express appreciation for the loving spiritual guidance they receive from the elders . 
 For example , consider Birgit , a Christian wife in her 30 ’ s . 
 As a teenager , she got into bad company and almost slipped into wrongdoing . 
 But the clear Biblical counsel of the elders and the support of fellow believers helped her out of a potentially harmful situation . 
 How does Birgit feel now ? 
 She says : “ I am deeply grateful that I still belong to Jehovah’s wonderful organization . ” 
 A 17 - year - old named Andreas states : “ This is really Jehovah’s organization , the best organization in the world . ” 
 Should we not be grateful for the goodness of the earthly part of Jehovah’s organization ? 
 Those Taking the Lead Are Imperfect 
 8 , 9 . 
 How did some of David’s contemporaries act , and how did David react to such behavior ? 
 Of course , those appointed to take the lead in true worship are imperfect . 
 All of them make mistakes , and some have persistent weaknesses that they are working hard to control . 
 Need we be upset because of this ? 
 No . 
 Even individuals entrusted with much responsibility in ancient Israel made grave errors . 
 While David was still a young person , for instance , he was called upon to serve as musician to calm troubled King Saul . 
 Later , Saul tried to kill David , who ultimately had to flee for his life . ​ — 1 Samuel 16 : 14 - 23 ; 18 : 10 - 12 ; 19 : 18 ; 20 : 32 , 33 ; 22 : 1 - 5 . 
 Other Israelites behaved treacherously . 
 For instance , David’s military commander Joab murdered Saul’s relative Abner . 
 Absalom conspired against his father , David , for the kingship . 
 And David’s trusted adviser Ahithophel betrayed him . 
 Yet , David did not become a bitter complainer ; nor did he turn his back on true worship . 
 In fact , the opposite was true . 
 Adversity moved David to cling to Jehovah and maintain the fine attitude he had when he ran away because of Saul . 
 At that time , David sang : “ Show me favor , O God , show me favor , for in you my soul has taken refuge ; and in the shadow of your wings I take refuge until the adversities pass over . ” ​ — Psalm 57 : 1 . 
 10 , 11 . 
 What did a Christian named Gertrud experience as a young person , and what did she say about the failings of fellow believers ? 
 We have no reason to complain of treachery within God’s organization today . 
 Neither Jehovah nor his angels nor the spiritual shepherds tolerate the presence of treacherous , wicked ones in the Christian congregation . 
 Nevertheless , all of us are confronted with human imperfection ​ — our own and that of other servants of God . 
 When Gertrud , a longtime worshipper of Jehovah , was a young woman , she was falsely accused of being a fraud and not a full - time Kingdom proclaimer . 
 How did she react ? 
 Did Gertrud murmur about such treatment ? 
 No . 
 Shortly before her death in 2003 at the age of 91 , she looked back on her life and explained : “ These and later experiences taught me that despite mistakes made by individuals , Jehovah directs his great work , in which he uses us imperfect humans . ” 
 When confronted with the imperfections of other servants of God , Gertrud turned to Jehovah in heartfelt prayer . 
 ( a ) What poor example did some first - century Christians set ? 
 ( b ) On what should we fix our thoughts ? 
 Since even the most loyal and devoted Christians are imperfect , when an appointed servant makes a mistake , let us continue to do “ all things free from murmurings . ” 
 How sad it would be if we were to follow the poor example of a few in the first - century Christian congregation ! 
 According to the disciple Jude , false teachers of that day were “ disregarding lordship and speaking abusively of glorious ones . ” 
 Moreover , those wrongdoers were “ murmurers , complainers about their lot in life . ” 
 May we reject the path followed by murmuring complainers and fix our thoughts on the fine things that come to us through the ‘ faithful slave . ’ 
 Let us appreciate the goodness of Jehovah’s organization and “ keep doing all things free from murmurings . ” 
 “ This Speech Is Shocking ” 
 How did some react to certain teachings of Jesus Christ ? 
 Whereas some in the first century murmured against appointed servants , others were murmurers against Jesus ’ teachings . 
 As recorded at John 6 : 48 - 69 , Jesus stated : “ He that feeds on my flesh and drinks my blood has everlasting life . ” 
 Upon hearing these words , “ many of his disciples . . . said : ‘ This speech is shocking ; who can listen to it ? ’ ” 
 Jesus was aware that “ his disciples were murmuring about this . ” 
 Moreover , “ owing to this many of [ them ] went off to the things behind and would no longer walk with him . ” 
 But not every disciple murmured . 
 Note what happened when Jesus asked the 12 apostles : “ You do not want to go also , do you ? ” 
 The apostle Peter answered : “ Lord , whom shall we go away to ? 
 You have sayings of everlasting life ; and we have believed and come to know that you are the Holy One of God . ” 
 14 , 15 . ( a ) Why do a few become disgruntled with some aspect of Christian teachings ? 
 ( b ) What can we learn from the case of a man named Emanuel ? 
 In modern times , a very small number among God’s people have become disgruntled with some aspect of Christian teaching and have murmured against the earthly part of Jehovah’s organization . 
 Why does this happen ? 
 Such murmuring is often caused by a lack of understanding of God’s way of doing things . 
 The Creator progressively reveals the truth to his people . 
 Hence , our understanding of the Scriptures is bound to be refined from time to time . 
 The vast majority of Jehovah’s people rejoice over such refinements . 
 A few become “ righteous overmuch ” and resent the changes . 
 Pride may play a role , and some fall into the trap of independent thinking . 
 Whatever the reason , such murmuring is hazardous , since it can draw us back into the world and its ways . 
 Emanuel , for instance , was a Witness who found fault with some things he read in publications of “ the faithful and discreet slave . ” 
 He stopped reading our Christian literature and eventually told the elders of the local congregation that he no longer wished to be one of Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 Within a short time , however , Emanuel came to realize that the teachings of Jehovah’s organization were correct after all . 
 He contacted the Witnesses , admitted his mistake , and was reinstated as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 As a result , he again became a happy man . 
 What can help us to overcome doubts about certain Christian teachings ? 
 What if we are tempted to murmur because of having doubts about certain teachings that Jehovah’s people hold in common ? 
 Then let us not be impatient . 
 The ‘ faithful slave ’ may eventually publish something that answers our questions and clears up our doubts . 
 It is wise to seek the help of Christian elders . 
 Prayer , personal study , and association with spiritually - minded fellow believers can also help to remove doubts and can deepen our appreciation for the faith - strengthening Bible truths we have learned through Jehovah’s channel of communication . 
 Maintain a Positive Spirit 
 17 , 18 . 
 Instead of murmuring , what attitude should we have , and why ? 
 Admittedly , imperfect humans have an inherent tendency to sin , and some may have a strong inclination to voice unwarranted complaints . 
 But if we were to become habitual murmurers , we would be putting at risk our relationship with Jehovah God . 
 Hence , we need to control any possible inclination to murmur . 
 Instead of murmuring about things in the congregation , we do well to maintain a positive attitude and follow a routine that keeps us busy , joyful , reverent , balanced , and healthy in faith . 
 Jehovah is in control of everything within his organization , and Jesus is aware of developments in each congregation , just as he was in the first century . 
 Patiently wait on God and Christ , the Head of the congregation . 
 Responsible shepherds may be used to correct matters that may need to be readjusted . ​ — Psalm 43 : 5 ; Colossians 1 : 18 ; Titus 1 : 5 . 
 Until the Kingdom is in full control of mankind’s affairs , on what should we focus our attention ? 
 Soon this wicked system of things will end , and the Messianic Kingdom will take full control of mankind’s affairs . 
 Until then , how important it is that each of us maintain a positive spirit ! 
 This will help us to recognize the virtues of our fellow believers , instead of focusing on their faults . 
 Focusing on the good aspects of their personality will make us happy . 
 Rather than being emotionally drained by murmuring , we will thus be encouraged and built up spiritually . 
 A positive attitude will enable us to enjoy what blessings ? 
 A positive spirit will also enable us to bear in mind the many blessings we enjoy because of being associated with the earthly part of Jehovah’s organization . 
 This is the only organization in the world that is loyal to the Sovereign of the universe . 
 How do you feel about that reality and the privilege of engaging in the worship of the only true God , Jehovah ? 
 May your attitude be like that of David , who sang : “ O Hearer of prayer , even to you people of all flesh will come . 
 Happy is the one you choose and cause to approach , that he may reside in your courtyards . 
 We will certainly be satisfied with the goodness of your house . ” ​ — Psalm 65 : 2 , 4 . 
 Do You Recall ? 
 • Why should we be grateful for those taking the lead in the congregation ? 
 • What should be our reaction when responsible brothers make mistakes ? 
 • How should we view refinements in the understanding of the Scriptures ? 
 • What can help a Christian to overcome doubts ? 
 [ Picture on page 20 ] 
 David gave Solomon the temple plans and wholeheartedly supported true worship 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 Christian elders gladly provide spiritual assistance 
 Jehovah Delivers the Afflicted One 
 “ Many are the calamities of the righteous one , but out of them all Jehovah delivers him . ” ​ — PSALM 34 : 19 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What problem did one faithful Christian face , and why may we be subject to similar feelings ? 
 A YOUNG woman named Keiko * has been one of Jehovah’s Witnesses for more than 20 years . 
 For a time , she served as a regular pioneer , or full - time Kingdom proclaimer . 
 She deeply cherished that privilege . 
 Not long ago , however , Keiko became overwhelmed by feelings of hopelessness and isolation . 
 “ All I could do was cry , ” she says . 
 To combat her negative thinking , Keiko devoted more time to personal study . 
 “ Still , I could not turn my condition around , ” she says . 
 “ It got to the point that I wanted to die . ” 
 Have you struggled with similar feelings of despair ? 
 As one of Jehovah’s Witnesses , you have abundant reason to rejoice because godly devotion “ holds promise of the life now and that which is to come . ” 
 Right now you dwell in a spiritual paradise ! 
 However , does that mean that you are shielded from all affliction ? 
 Hardly ! 
 The Bible says : “ Many are the calamities of the righteous one . ” 
 This is not surprising , for “ the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one , ” Satan the Devil . 
 To one degree or another , all of us experience the effects of that reality . ​ — Ephesians 6 : 12 . 
 The Effects of Affliction 
 Give Bible examples of God’s servants who experienced deep distress . 
 Prolonged distress can darken our entire outlook . 
 Consider the upright man Job . 
 In the midst of a terrible ordeal , Job said : “ Man , born of woman , is short - lived and glutted with agitation . ” 
 Job’s joy had vanished . 
 For a time , he even thought that Jehovah had abandoned him . 
 Job was not the only servant of God to experience intense anguish . 
 The Bible tells us that Hannah was “ bitter of soul ” because of her childless state . 
 Tormented over a family situation , Rebekah said : “ I have come to abhor this life of mine . ” 
 When reflecting on his errors , David said : “ All day long I have walked about sad . ” 
 These few examples make it clear that God - fearing men and women of the pre - Christian era endured periods of deep distress . 
 Why is it not surprising that there are “ depressed souls ” among Christians today ? 
 What about Christians ? 
 The apostle Paul found it necessary to tell the Thessalonians to “ speak consolingly to the depressed souls . ” 
 One reference work notes that the Greek word translated “ depressed souls ” can refer to those “ who are temporarily overwhelmed by the stress of life . ” 
 Paul’s words indicate that some spirit - anointed ones in that congregation at Thessalonica were downhearted . 
 There are depressed souls among Christians today too . 
 But why are they despondent ? 
 Let us consider three common causes . 
 Our Sinful Nature Can Distress Us 
 5 , 6 . 
 What comfort can be drawn from Romans 7 : 22 - 25 ? 
 Unlike corrupt individuals who are “ past all moral sense , ” true Christians are pained by their sinful state . 
 They may feel as did Paul , who wrote : “ I really delight in the law of God according to the man I am within , but I behold in my members another law warring against the law of my mind and leading me captive to sin’s law that is in my members . ” 
 Then Paul exclaimed : “ Miserable man that I am ! ” ​ — Romans 7 : 22 - 24 . 
 Have you ever felt as Paul did ? 
 It is not wrong for you to be keenly aware of your imperfections , for this can impress upon you the gravity of sin and can strengthen your resolve to shun badness . 
 But you do not need to be in a constant state of misery over your shortcomings . 
 To his words of distress just quoted , Paul added : “ Thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord ! ” 
 Yes , Paul had confidence that Jesus ’ shed blood could redeem him from inherited sin . ​ — Romans 5 : 18 . 
 What can help a person not to be distressed because of his sinful tendencies ? 
 If you feel overwhelmed by your sinful nature , take comfort in the words of the apostle John , who wrote : “ If anyone does commit a sin , we have a helper with the Father , Jesus Christ , a righteous one . 
 And he is a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins , yet not for ours only but also for the whole world’s . ” 
 If you are distressed because of your sinful tendencies , always remember that Jesus died for sinners , not for perfect people . 
 Really , “ all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God . ” ​ — Romans 3 : 23 . 
 8 , 9 . 
 Why should we reject self - condemning thoughts ? 
 Suppose , however , that you sinned seriously in the past . 
 No doubt , you have taken the matter to Jehovah in prayer , perhaps quite often . 
 You have received spiritual help from Christian elders . 
 You were truly repentant and therefore remained a part of the congregation . 
 Or perhaps you left God’s organization for a while , but you later repented and regained a clean standing . 
 In either situation , your past sin may come to mind and distress you . 
 If that happens , remember that Jehovah forgives truly repentant ones “ in a large way . ” 
 Furthermore , he does not want you to feel hopelessly condemned . 
 That would serve Satan’s purpose . 
 The Devil will be destroyed because that is what he deserves , but he would like to have you feel that you deserve the same judgment . 
 Do not let Satan succeed in this scheme to destroy your faith . 
 Instead , “ take your stand against him ” in this regard , even as you do in other ways . ​ — 1 Peter 5 : 9 . 
 At Revelation 12 : 10 , Satan is called “ the accuser of our brothers ” ​ — anointed Christians . 
 He “ accuses them day and night ” before God . 
 Reflecting on that verse may help you to see that Satan , the false accuser , would be pleased if you were to accuse and condemn yourself , although Jehovah does not do so . 
 Why keep on agonizing over your failings to such an extent that you feel like giving up ? 
 Do not let Satan destroy your relationship with God . 
 Never let the Devil blind you to the fact that Jehovah is “ merciful and gracious , slow to anger and abundant in loving - kindness . ” ​ — Exodus 34 : 6 . 
 Our Limitations Can Discourage Us 
 In what ways might our limitations discourage us ? 
 Some Christians are discouraged because of the way their limitations affect their service to God . 
 Is that true of you ? 
 It may be that a serious illness , advanced years , or other circumstances prevent you from devoting as much time to the ministry as you did in the past . 
 Granted , Christians are encouraged to buy out time for God’s service . 
 But what if genuine limitations prevent you from doing more in the ministry and this is a source of discouragement to you ? 
 How can Paul’s counsel recorded at Galatians 6 : 4 benefit us ? 
 The Bible urges us not to be sluggish but to be “ imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises . ” 
 We can do this only if we examine their fine example and seek to imitate their faith . 
 However , we will not benefit if we compare ourselves unfavorably with others and conclude that nothing we do is good enough . 
 Therefore , we do well to apply Paul’s counsel : “ Let each one prove what his own work is , and then he will have cause for exultation in regard to himself alone , and not in comparison with the other person . ” ​ — Galatians 6 : 4 . 
 Why can we exult in the service we render to Jehovah ? 
 Christians have good reason to exult , even when they are limited by severe health problems . 
 The Bible assures us : “ God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name . ” 
 It may be that circumstances beyond your control have made it difficult for you to maintain the level of activity that you once enjoyed . 
 With Jehovah’s help , however , you may be able to engage more fully in certain aspects of the Christian ministry , such as telephone witnessing and letter writing . 
 You can be sure that Jehovah God will bless you for your whole - souled service and the love you show for him and for fellow humans . ​ — Matthew 22 : 36 - 40 . 
 “ Critical Times ” Can Wear Us Down 
 13 , 14 . ( a ) In what ways may these “ critical times ” cause us affliction ? 
 ( b ) How is a lack of natural affection evident today ? 
 Although we look forward to life in God’s righteous new world , right now we live in “ critical times hard to deal with . ” 
 We take comfort in the knowledge that distressing events point to the nearness of our deliverance . 
 Yet , we are affected by the conditions that surround us . 
 For example , what if you are unemployed ? 
 Jobs may be scarce , and as the months pass , you could wonder if Jehovah sees your plight or hears your prayers . 
 Or perhaps you have become the victim of discrimination or some other form of injustice . 
 Even scanning newspaper headlines can make you feel as did the righteous man Lot , who was “ greatly distressed ” ( “ worn down , ” Young’s Literal Translation of the Holy Bible ) by the loose conduct of those around him . ​ — 2 Peter 2 : 7 . 
 There is one particular aspect of the last days that we cannot overlook . 
 The Bible foretold that many would have “ no natural affection . ” 
 Family affection is sorely lacking in many households . 
 Indeed , “ evidence suggests that people are more likely to be killed , physically assaulted , or emotionally or sexually abused by other family members than by anyone else , ” says the book Family Violence . 
 “ The place where people should be loved and feel safe is , for some adults and children , the most dangerous place of all . ” 
 Those who have been exposed to an unwholesome home environment may in later years experience bouts of anxiety and despair . 
 What if this is true of you ? 
 How is Jehovah’s love superior to that of any human ? 
 The psalmist David sang : “ In case my own father and my own mother did leave me , even Jehovah himself would take me up . ” 
 How comforting to know that Jehovah’s love exceeds that of any human parent ! 
 As painful as rejection , mistreatment , or abandonment by a parent may be , it has no bearing on how much Jehovah cares for you . 
 Remember that God draws those whom he loves . 
 Regardless of how you have been treated by humans , you are loved by your heavenly Father ! 
 Practical Steps to Relieve Despondency 
 16 , 17 . 
 When faced with despondency , what can a person do to preserve his spiritual strength ? 
 You can take practical steps to cope with despondency . 
 For instance , follow a healthy program of Christian activity . 
 Meditate on God’s Word , especially when discouragement seems overwhelming . 
 The psalmist sang : “ When I said : ‘ My foot will certainly move unsteadily , ’ your own loving - kindness , O Jehovah , kept sustaining me . 
 When my disquieting thoughts became many inside of me , your own consolations began to fondle my soul . ” 
 Regular Bible reading will help to fill your mind with consoling words and sustaining thoughts . 
 Prayer too is vital . 
 Even if you cannot fully express the depth of your feelings in words , Jehovah knows what you are trying to say . 
 The psalmist gave this assurance : “ Throw your burden upon Jehovah himself , and he himself will sustain you . 
 Never will he allow the righteous one to totter . ” ​ — Psalm 55 : 22 . 
 What practical steps might a depressed one take ? 
 Some experience despair because of clinical depression . 
 * If this is true of you , try to focus some of your attention on God’s new world and the time when “ no resident will say : ‘ I am sick . ’ ” 
 If your negative feelings seem to be much more than an occasional case of the blues , it might be wise to seek professional help . 
 It is also important to take care of yourself physically . 
 A healthful diet and some exercise may be helpful . 
 Make sure that you are getting needed rest . 
 Do not stay up late watching television , and avoid forms of recreation that will leave you physically and emotionally depleted . 
 Above all , continue to engage in godly works ! 
 Although it is not yet the time when Jehovah will “ wipe out every tear , ” he will help you to endure . ​ — Revelation 21 : 4 ; 1 Corinthians 10 : 13 . 
 Living “ Under the Mighty Hand of God ” 
 What does Jehovah promise those who are afflicted ? 
 The Bible assures us that although the calamities of the righteous one are many , “ out of them all Jehovah delivers him . ” 
 How does God do this ? 
 When the apostle Paul repeatedly prayed for deliverance from his “ thorn in the flesh , ” Jehovah told him : “ My power is being made perfect in weakness . ” 
 What did Jehovah promise Paul , and what does he promise you ? 
 Not a present - day cure , but the power to endure . 
 Despite our trials , we are assured of what at 1 Peter 5 : 6 , 7 ? 
 The apostle Peter wrote : “ Humble yourselves . . . under the mighty hand of God , that he may exalt you in due time ; while you throw all your anxiety upon him , because he cares for you . ” 
 Because Jehovah cares for you , he will not abandon you . 
 He will support you despite the trials you experience . 
 Bear in mind that faithful Christians are “ under the mighty hand of God . ” 
 As we serve Jehovah , he gives us strength to endure . 
 If we are faithful to him , nothing can do us permanent spiritual harm . 
 May we , therefore , maintain integrity to Jehovah so that we can enjoy everlasting life in his promised new world and see the day when he will indeed have delivered the afflicted one permanently ! 
 [ Footnotes ] 
 Name has been changed . 
 More than discouragement , clinical depression is a diagnosed condition in which sadness is intense and ongoing . 
 For additional information , see The Watchtower of October 15 , 1988 , pages 25 - 9 ; November 15 , 1988 , pages 21 - 4 ; and September 1 , 1996 , pages 30 - 1 . 
 Do You Recall ? 
 • Why does affliction affect even servants of Jehovah ? 
 • What are some factors that can cause some of God’s people to feel despondent ? 
 • How does Jehovah help us to cope with our anxieties ? 
 • In what way are we “ under the mighty hand of God ” ? 
 [ Pictures on page 25 ] 
 Despite trials , Jehovah’s people have reason to rejoice 
 [ Picture on page 28 ] 
 Telephone witnessing is one way to give Jehovah your best 
 Be Wise ​ — Fear God ! 
 “ The fear of Jehovah is the start of wisdom . ” ​ — PROVERBS 9 : 10 . 
 Why do many find the concept of fearing God hard to understand ? 
 THERE was a time when it was considered a compliment to describe someone as God - fearing . 
 Today , many find the concept of fearing God quaint but hard to understand . 
 ‘ If God is love , ’ they may ask , ‘ why should I fear him ? ’ 
 To them , fear is a negative , even paralyzing , emotion . 
 True fear of God , however , has a much broader meaning and , as we shall see , is not just a feeling or an emotion . 
 2 , 3 . 
 What does genuine fear of God include ? 
 In Biblical usage the fear of God is a positive concept . 
 It is a profound reverence and deep respect for God , a strong desire not to displease him . 
 It includes acceptance of and strict adherence to God’s moral standards and a desire to live by what God says is right or wrong . 
 One reference work points out that such a wholesome fear expresses “ a fundamental attitude toward God that leads to wise behavior and the avoidance of every form of evil . ” 
 Appropriately , God’s Word tells us : “ The fear of Jehovah is the start of wisdom . ” ​ — Proverbs 9 : 10 . 
 Indeed , the fear of God encompasses a wide range of human experience . 
 It is associated not only with wisdom but also with joy , peace , prosperity , longevity , hope , trust , and confidence . 
 It is closely related to faith and love . 
 In fact , it involves our entire relationship with God and with fellow humans . 
 Fear of God includes the deep conviction that our heavenly Father personally cares for us and is ready to forgive our transgressions . 
 Only the unrepentant wicked have reason to be terrified of God . 
 * ​ — Hebrews 10 : 26 - 31 . 
 Learning to Fear Jehovah 
 What can help us to “ learn to fear Jehovah ” ? 
 Since the fear of God is fundamental to making wise decisions and receiving God’s blessings , how can we “ learn to fear Jehovah ” properly ? 
 Many examples of God - fearing men and women are recorded in the Scriptures “ for our instruction . ” 
 To help us understand what it really means to fear God , let us reflect on the life of one of those examples , King David of ancient Israel . 
 How did shepherding help to teach David about fearing Jehovah ? 
 Jehovah rejected Israel’s first king , Saul , for his fear of the people and his lack of godly fear . 
 On the other hand , David’s life course and his intimate relationship with Jehovah identify him as a truly God - fearing man . 
 From his early years , David was often out pasturing his father’s sheep . 
 Nights spent shepherding under the stars must have helped David to understand the fear of Jehovah . 
 Though David could discern only a small part of the immensity of the universe , he drew the right conclusion ​ — God merits our respect and adoration . 
 “ When I see your heavens , the works of your fingers , the moon and the stars that you have prepared , ” he later wrote , “ what is mortal man that you keep him in mind , and the son of earthling man that you take care of him ? ” ​ — Psalm 8 : 3 , 4 . 
 How did perceiving Jehovah’s greatness make David feel ? 
 Rightly , David was impressed when he compared his smallness with the vast starry heavens . 
 Rather than frightening him , this knowledge moved him to praise Jehovah and say : “ The heavens are declaring the glory of God ; and of the work of his hands the expanse is telling . ” 
 This reverence for God drew David closer to Jehovah and made David want to learn and follow His perfect ways . 
 Imagine how David felt when he sang to Jehovah : “ You are great and are doing wondrous things ; you are God , you alone . 
 Instruct me , O Jehovah , about your way . 
 I shall walk in your truth . 
 Unify my heart to fear your name . ” ​ — Psalm 86 : 10 , 11 . 
 How did fearing God help David fight Goliath ? 
 When the Philistines invaded the land of Israel , their nine - and - a - half - foot - tall champion , Goliath , taunted the Israelites , saying in effect : ‘ Put up a man to fight me one - on - one ! 
 If he wins , we will serve you . ’ 
 Saul and his entire army were terrified ​ — but not David . 
 He knew that Jehovah was the one to be feared , not any man , no matter how powerful . 
 “ I am coming to you with the name of Jehovah of armies , ” David told Goliath , “ and all this congregation will know that neither with sword nor with spear does Jehovah save , because to Jehovah belongs the battle . ” 
 With his sling and a single stone ​ — and with Jehovah’s help — ​ David struck down the giant . ​ — 1 Samuel 17 : 45 - 47 . 
 What do Bible examples of God - fearing ones teach us ? 
 We may be facing obstacles or enemies no less daunting than those confronted by David . 
 What can we do ? 
 We can deal with them in the same way that David and other faithful ones of old did ​ — with godly fear . 
 The fear of God can overpower the fear of man . 
 God’s faithful servant Nehemiah urged his fellow Israelites , who were under pressure from opposers : “ Do not be afraid on their account . 
 Jehovah the great and the fear - inspiring One keep in your mind . ” 
 With Jehovah’s backing , David , Nehemiah , and other faithful servants of God succeeded in carrying out their God - given assignments . 
 With godly fear , so can we . 
 Facing Problems With Godly Fear 
 Under what circumstances did David display fear of God ? 
 After David slew Goliath , Jehovah gave him more victories . 
 Jealous Saul , however , attempted ​ — first impulsively , then cunningly , and finally with an army — ​ to kill David . 
 Although Jehovah had assured David that he would be king , for years David had to flee , to fight , and to wait for Jehovah’s time to make him king . 
 Through all of this , David showed that he feared the true God . ​ — 1 Samuel 18 : 9 , 11 , 17 ; 24 : 2 . 
 How did David show fear of God in the face of danger ? 
 On one occasion , David sought refuge with Achish , king of the Philistine city of Gath , the home of Goliath . 
 The king’s servants denounced David as an enemy of their nation . 
 How did David react in that dangerous situation ? 
 He poured out his heart in prayer to Jehovah . 
 Although he had to feign insanity to get away , David knew that it was really Jehovah who had delivered him by blessing his efforts . 
 David’s wholehearted reliance on Jehovah and confidence in him showed that David was truly God - fearing . ​ — Psalm 34 : 4 - 6 , 9 - 11 . 
 How can we show godly fear under trial , as David did ? 
 Like David , we can show fear of God by trusting in his promise to help us cope with our problems . 
 “ Roll upon Jehovah your way , and rely upon him , and he himself will act , ” said David . 
 This does not mean that we simply hand our problems over to Jehovah without doing what we can about them and expect him to act in our behalf . 
 David did not pray to God for help and then leave matters at that . 
 He used the physical and intellectual abilities that Jehovah granted him and tackled the problem at hand . 
 Yet , David knew that human efforts alone could not be counted on for success . 
 So it should be with us . 
 Having done everything within our power , we must leave the rest to Jehovah . 
 In fact , often there is nothing we can do but rely on Jehovah . 
 This is where the fear of God comes into the picture in a very personal way . 
 We can take comfort in David’s heartfelt expression : “ The intimacy with Jehovah belongs to those fearful of him . ” ​ — Psalm 25 : 14 . 
 Why do we need to take our prayers seriously , and what attitude should we never have ? 
 We , therefore , should take our prayers and our relationship with God seriously . 
 When we approach Jehovah , we must “ believe that he is and that he becomes the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him . ” 
 And when he helps us , we should ‘ show ourselves thankful , ’ as the apostle Paul counseled us . 
 We must never be like those described by an experienced anointed Christian : “ They think of God as a sort of celestial waiter , ” he said . 
 “ When they need something , they want to snap their fingers and have him come . 
 And when they’ve got what they want , they would like him to go away . ” 
 Such an attitude betrays a lack of godly fear . 
 When Fear of God Lapsed 
 When did David fail to show respect for God’s Law ? 
 Experiencing Jehovah’s help during distress deepened David’s fear of God and strengthened his confidence in him . 
 On three notable occasions , however , David’s fear of God lapsed , which led to serious consequences . 
 The first involved his arranging for the ark of Jehovah’s covenant to be transported to Jerusalem on a wagon rather than on the shoulders of the Levites , as God’s Law directed . 
 When Uzzah , who was leading the wagon , grabbed hold of the Ark to steady it , he died on the spot for his “ irreverent act . ” 
 Yes , Uzzah sinned seriously , yet ultimately , it was David’s failure to maintain proper respect for God’s Law that brought about that tragic outcome . 
 Fearing God means doing things according to his arrangement . ​ — 2 Samuel 6 : 2 - 9 ; Numbers 4 : 15 ; 7 : 9 . 
 What resulted from David’s counting of Israel ? 
 Later , incited by Satan , David took a count of Israel’s fighting men . 
 In so doing , David showed a lapse in the fear of God , resulting in the death of 70,000 Israelites . 
 Although David repented before Jehovah , he and those around him suffered greatly . ​ — 2 Samuel 24 : 1 - 16 . 
 What caused David to fall into sexual sin ? 
 Another temporary lapse in the fear of God led David into an immoral relationship with Bath - sheba , the wife of Uriah . 
 David knew that adultery or even desiring another’s mate was wrong . 
 The problem began when David caught sight of Bath - sheba while she was bathing . 
 Proper fear of God should immediately have moved David to turn his eyes and his thoughts elsewhere . 
 Instead , David evidently ‘ kept on looking ’ at her until passion overpowered his fear of God . 
 David lost sight of Jehovah’s intimate involvement in his life . ​ — Psalm 139 : 1 - 7 . 
 What consequences did David suffer for his wrongdoing ? 
 David’s liaison with Bath - sheba produced a son . 
 Shortly afterward , Jehovah sent his prophet Nathan to expose David’s sin . 
 Brought to his senses , David recovered his fear of God and repented . 
 He begged Jehovah not to cast him off or to remove His holy spirit from him . 
 Jehovah forgave David and lightened the punishment , but He did not shield David from all the bad consequences of his actions . 
 David’s son died , and heartache and tragedy beset his family from then on . 
 What a price to pay for a lapse in the fear of God ! ​ — 2 Samuel 12 : 10 - 14 ; 13 : 10 - 14 ; 15 : 14 . 
 Illustrate the heartache that sinful acts produce . 
 Today , failing to fear God in moral matters may likewise have serious and long - lasting repercussions . 
 Imagine the pain of one young wife when she learned that her Christian husband had been unfaithful to her while working overseas . 
 Doubled over in shock and grief , she buried her face in her hands and burst into tears . 
 How long will it take for her husband to regain her trust and respect ? 
 Such tragic consequences can be avoided by truly fearing God . ​ — 1 Corinthians 6 : 18 . 
 Fear of God Restrains Us From Sin 
 What is Satan’s objective and method of operation ? 
 Satan is very rapidly driving down the world’s moral values , and he especially wants to corrupt true Christians . 
 To do so , he exploits the most direct route into our hearts and minds ​ — through our senses , particularly our eyes and ears . 
 How will you react when you unexpectedly encounter immoral images , words , or people ? 
 How did godly fear help one Christian to overcome temptation ? 
 Consider the case of André , * a Christian elder , father , and medical doctor in Europe . 
 When André was on all - night duty in the hospital , female colleagues repeatedly pinned notes ​ — decorated with hearts — ​ to his pillow , inviting him to have sexual relations with them . 
 André steadfastly refused to entertain their advances . 
 Moreover , to remove himself from the bad environment , he found work elsewhere . 
 Fearing God proved to be very wise and led to blessings , for today André serves part - time at the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in his country . 
 20 , 21 . ( a ) How can fear of God help us to avoid sinning ? 
 ( b ) What will be considered in the following article ? 
 Dwelling on wrong thoughts can lead to a state of mind in which a person is willing to throw away his precious relationship with Jehovah in exchange for something to which he has no right . 
 On the other hand , if we fear Jehovah , we will stay away ​ — even walk away — ​ from people , places , activities , and entertainment that could cause us to lower our moral guard . 
 Whatever embarrassment or sacrifice may be involved , it is minor compared to losing God’s favor . 
 Fearing God certainly includes never deliberately exposing ourselves to anything immoral , including pornography in any form , but instead making our eyes “ pass on from seeing what is worthless . ” 
 If we do so , we can trust in Jehovah to ‘ preserve us alive ’ and provide everything we really need . ​ — Psalm 84 : 11 ; 119 : 37 . 
 Indeed , acting with genuine fear of God is always the course of wisdom . 
 It is also the source of true happiness . 
 This will be made clear in the following article . 
 [ Footnotes ] 
 See the article “ The Bible’s Viewpoint : How Can You Fear a God of Love ? ” 
 in the January 8 , 1998 , issue of Awake ! 
 published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 The name has been changed . 
 Can You Explain ? 
 • What Christian qualities does the fear of God include ? 
 • How does fear of God counteract fear of man ? 
 • How can we show that we have the proper view of prayer ? 
 • How can fear of God restrain us from sinning ? 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 David learned the fear of God when observing Jehovah’s handiwork 
 [ Pictures on page 24 ] 
 How will you react when you unexpectedly encounter a tempting situation ? 
 Fear Jehovah ​ — Be Happy ! 
 “ Happy is the man in fear of Jehovah . ” ​ — PSALM 112 : 1 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What can the fear of Jehovah bring ? 
 HAPPINESS does not come easily . 
 Real happiness is contingent on making the right choices , doing what is right , and turning away from what is wrong . 
 Our Maker , Jehovah , has given us his Word , the Bible , to teach us how to enjoy the very best way of life . 
 By seeking and following Jehovah’s direction , thus displaying the fear of God , we can be truly satisfied and happy . ​ — Psalm 23 : 1 ; Proverbs 14 : 26 . 
 In this article , we will consider Biblical and modern - day examples that show how genuine fear of God gives one strength to resist pressure to do what is wrong and courage to do what is right . 
 We will see that godly fear can bring us happiness by moving us to correct a wrong course , as King David had to do . 
 We will also see that the fear of Jehovah is a truly precious heritage that parents can pass on to their children . 
 Indeed , God’s Word assures us : “ Happy is the man in fear of Jehovah . ” ​ — Psalm 112 : 1 . 
 Regaining Lost Happiness 
 What helped David to recover from his sins ? 
 As considered in the preceding article , David on three notable occasions failed to show proper godly fear and sinned . 
 However , his response to Jehovah’s discipline showed that he was essentially a God - fearing person . 
 His reverence and respect for God moved him to admit his guilt , correct his course , and reestablish a good relationship with Jehovah . 
 Although his errors brought suffering on him and others , his genuine repentance won Jehovah’s continued support and blessing . 
 David’s example can surely instill courage in Christians today who may fall into serious sin . 
 How can the fear of God help a person regain happiness ? 
 Take Sonja’s case . 
 * Though serving as a full - time evangelizer , Sonja got into bad company , became involved in unchristian conduct , and had to be disfellowshipped from the Christian congregation . 
 Coming to her senses , Sonja did everything necessary to repair her relationship with Jehovah . 
 In time , she was reinstated in the congregation . 
 Through all of this , Sonja never gave up her desire to serve Jehovah . 
 Eventually , she again entered the full - time pioneer ministry . 
 Later , she married a fine Christian elder , and now she happily serves with him in the congregation . 
 Though Sonja regrets having temporarily strayed from the Christian path , she is happy that her fear of God helped her to come back . 
 To Suffer Rather Than Sin 
 5 , 6 . 
 Explain how and why David twice spared Saul’s life . 
 It is much better , of course , when the fear of God helps one to avoid sinning in the first place . 
 This proved true of David . 
 Once , pursuing David with three thousand troops , Saul entered a cave ​ — the very cave where David and his men were hiding . 
 David’s men urged him to strike Saul . 
 Was not Jehovah giving David’s mortal enemy into his hand ? 
 Silently , David crept up to Saul and cut off the skirt of his garment . 
 Because David feared God , even that relatively harmless act tormented his conscience . 
 David dispersed his agitated men , saying : “ It is unthinkable , on my part , from Jehovah’s standpoint , that I should do this thing to my lord , the anointed of Jehovah . ” 
 * ​ — 1 Samuel 24 : 1 - 7 . 
 On a later occasion , Saul was encamped for the night , and he and all his men fell into “ a deep sleep from Jehovah . ” 
 David and his bold nephew Abishai slipped into the very middle of the camp and stood right over the sleeping Saul . 
 Abishai wanted to do away with him once and for all . 
 David restrained Abishai , asking : “ Who is it that has thrust his hand out against the anointed of Jehovah and has remained innocent ? ” ​ — 1 Samuel 26 : 9 , 12 . 
 What held David back from sinning ? 
 Why did David not strike Saul down when he twice had the opportunity ? 
 Because he feared Jehovah more than he feared Saul . 
 Out of proper fear of God , David was prepared to suffer , if necessary , rather than sin . 
 He had complete confidence in Jehovah’s care for His people and for him personally . 
 David knew that obeying and trusting in God would bring happiness and many blessings , while ignoring God would earn him God’s disfavor . 
 He also knew that God would fulfill His promise to make David king and would remove Saul in His own time and way . ​ — 1 Samuel 26 : 10 . 
 Fearing God Brings Happiness 
 How does David’s conduct under pressure serve as an example ? 
 As Christians , we can expect ridicule , persecution , and other trials . 
 At times , we may even experience difficulties involving fellow worshippers . 
 However , we know that Jehovah sees all things , hears our prayers and , at the right time , will straighten out matters according to his will . 
 Therefore , rather than fear our opposers , we fear God and look to him to deliver us . 
 Like David , we do not avenge ourselves , nor do we compromise righteous principles to avoid suffering . 
 In the end , this brings happiness . 
 But how ? 
 Give an example of how fearing God can result in happiness despite persecution . 
 “ I think about a certain mother and her teenage daughter who because of their Christian neutrality refused to buy political party cards , ” relates a longtime missionary in Africa . 
 “ They were brutally assaulted by a crowd of men and then were told to go home . 
 As they walked along , the mother tried to comfort her weeping daughter , who struggled to understand why this had happened . 
 They were not joyful then , but they had a clean conscience . 
 Later , they were very happy that they had obeyed God . 
 Had they bought the party cards , the crowd would have been ecstatic . 
 The men would have given them bottles of soft drinks and danced around them all the way home . 
 But the girl and her mother , knowing they had compromised , would have been the most unhappy people in the world . ” 
 Their fear of God spared them all of that . 
 10 , 11 . 
 What good results came from one woman’s fear of God ? 
 Showing godly fear also results in happiness when facing trials involving respect for the sanctity of life . 
 When Mary was pregnant with her third child , the doctor urged her to have an abortion . 
 “ Your condition is dangerous , ” he said . 
 “ You could have a crisis at any time and die within 24 hours . 
 Then the baby would die too . 
 In any case , there is no guarantee that the baby will be normal . ” 
 Mary had been studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses but was not yet baptized . 
 “ Still , ” Mary says , “ I had decided to serve Jehovah , and I was determined to remain obedient to him , no matter what . ” ​ — Exodus 21 : 22 , 23 . 
 During her pregnancy , Mary kept busy studying the Bible and caring for her family . 
 Finally the baby came . 
 “ The birth was a little harder than the first two , but there were no major complications , ” relates Mary . 
 Fearing God helped Mary to keep a good conscience , and she was soon baptized . 
 As that baby grew up , he too learned to fear Jehovah , and he is presently serving at one of the branch offices of Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 ‘ Strengthen Yourself by Jehovah ’ 
 How did the fear of God strengthen David ? 
 David’s fear of Jehovah did more than just restrain him from doing wrong . 
 It strengthened him to act decisively and wisely under difficult circumstances . 
 For a year and four months , David and his men took refuge from Saul at Ziklag in the Philistine countryside . 
 Once while the men were away , marauding Amalekites burned the city and carried off all the men’s wives , children , and flocks . 
 Upon returning and seeing what had happened , David and his men wept . 
 Grief quickly turned to bitterness , and David’s men spoke of stoning him . 
 Though distressed , David did not despair . 
 His fear of God moved him to turn to Jehovah , and he “ took to strengthening himself by Jehovah . ” 
 With God’s help , David and his men overtook the Amalekites and recovered everything . ​ — 1 Samuel 30 : 1 - 20 . 
 13 , 14 . 
 How did fear of God help one Christian to make good decisions ? 
 God’s servants today also face situations that require trust in Jehovah and courage to act decisively . 
 Take Kristina as an example . 
 As a youth , Kristina studied the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 But she wanted to become a concert pianist , and she made considerable advancement to that end . 
 Moreover , she felt self - conscious about preaching and was therefore afraid to accept the responsibilities that would come with baptism . 
 As Kristina continued to study God’s Word , she began to sense its power . 
 She was learning the fear of Jehovah , and she realized that Jehovah expects his servants to love him with their whole heart , mind , soul , and strength . 
 This moved her to dedicate herself to Jehovah and get baptized . 
 Kristina asked Jehovah for help to make spiritual advancement . 
 “ I knew that the life of a concert pianist involves constant travel and contracts to play as many as 400 concerts a year , ” Kristina explains . 
 “ So I decided instead to become a teacher so as to support myself financially and serve as a full - time evangelizer . ” 
 At that time , Kristina was already slated to give her debut performance in her country’s best - known concert hall . 
 “ My debut concert turned out to be my retirement concert , ” she relates . 
 Kristina has since married a Christian elder . 
 Together , they now serve at one of the branch offices of Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 She is happy that Jehovah gave her the strength to make right decisions and that she can now use her time and energy in his service . 
 A Precious Heritage 
 What did David want to pass on to his children , and how did he do so ? 
 “ Come , you sons , listen to me , ” wrote David . 
 “ The fear of Jehovah is what I shall teach you . ” 
 As a father , David was intent on passing on to his children a precious heritage ​ — the genuine , balanced , wholesome fear of Jehovah . 
 By words and by deeds , David portrayed Jehovah , not as a demanding and fearsome God , ready to pounce on any infraction of His laws , but as a loving , caring , and forgiving Father of His earthly children . 
 “ Missteps who can keep track of ? ” 
 asked David . 
 Then , indicating his confidence that Jehovah is not constantly scrutinizing our errors , he added : “ Hold me clear of unnoticed things ! ” 
 David was sure that if he put forth his best effort , his words and thoughts could be acceptable to Jehovah . ​ — Psalm 19 : 12 , 14 , Byington . 
 16 , 17 . 
 How can parents teach children the fear of Jehovah ? 
 David stands as an example for parents today . 
 “ Our parents raised us in a way that made being in the truth enjoyable , ” says Ralph , who along with his brother serves at a branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 “ When we were young , they included us in their conversations about congregation activities , and we became as enthusiastic about the truth as they were . 
 They brought us up to believe that we could do good things in Jehovah’s service . 
 In fact , for several years our family lived in a country where there is a great need for Kingdom publishers and helped to establish new congregations . 
 “ What kept us on the right path was not a collection of rigid rules but the fact that to our parents , Jehovah was real and very , very kind and good . 
 They sought to get to know Jehovah better and to please him , and we learned from their genuine fear of God and love for him . 
 Even when we did something wrong , our parents did not make us feel that Jehovah no longer loved us ; nor did they angrily slap arbitrary restrictions on us . 
 Most of the time , they sat us down and just talked to us , Mom sometimes with tears in her eyes , trying to reach our heart . 
 And it worked . 
 We learned through our parents ’ words and deeds that the fear of Jehovah is a beautiful thing and that to be one of his Witnesses is a joy and a pleasure , not a burden . ” ​ — 1 John 5 : 3 . 
 What will we gain by fearing the true God ? 
 Among “ the last words of David , ” we read : “ When one ruling over mankind is righteous , ruling in the fear of God , then it is as the light of morning , when the sun shines forth . ” 
 Solomon , David’s son and successor , apparently got the point , for he requested that Jehovah grant him “ an obedient heart ” and the ability “ to discern between good and bad . ” 
 Solomon recognized that to fear Jehovah is the course of wisdom and happiness . 
 Later , he summarized the book of Ecclesiastes with the words : “ The conclusion of the matter , everything having been heard , is : Fear the true God and keep his commandments . 
 For this is the whole obligation of man . 
 For the true God himself will bring every sort of work into the judgment in relation to every hidden thing , as to whether it is good or bad . ” 
 If we heed that counsel , we will indeed find that “ the result of humility and the fear of Jehovah ” is not only wisdom and happiness but also “ riches and glory and life . ” ​ — Proverbs 22 : 4 . 
 What will enable us to understand “ the fear of Jehovah ” ? 
 From Biblical examples and modern - day experiences , we see that the proper fear of God plays a positive role in the life of true servants of Jehovah . 
 Not only can such fear prevent us from doing what is displeasing to our heavenly Father but it can also give us the courage to face our adversaries and the strength to endure the trials and hardships that come our way . 
 Therefore , let us , young and old , apply ourselves diligently in studying God’s Word , meditating on what we learn , and drawing close to Jehovah in regular and heartfelt prayers . 
 By doing so , we will not only find “ the very knowledge of God ” but also understand “ the fear of Jehovah . ” ​ — Proverbs 2 : 1 - 5 . 
 [ Footnotes ] 
 The names have been changed . 
 This may have been one of the experiences that moved David to compose Psalms 57 and 142 . 
 Can You Explain ? 
 How can the fear of God 
 • help one to recover from serious sin ? 
 • bring happiness under trials and persecution ? 
 • strengthen us to do God’s will ? 
 • be a precious heritage for our children ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 Fear of Jehovah kept David from striking King Saul 
 [ Pictures on page 29 ] 
 Fear of God is a precious heritage that parents can pass on to their children 
 Job ​ — A Man of Endurance and Integrity 
 “ Have you set your heart upon my servant Job , that there is no one like him in the earth , a man blameless and upright , fearing God and turning aside from bad ? ” ​ — JOB 1 : 8 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) What unexpected tragedies did Job experience ? 
 ( b ) Describe Job’s life before the tragedies struck . 
 THERE was a man who seemed to have everything ​ — wealth , prestige , good health , and a happy family life . 
 Then tragedy struck three times in quick succession . 
 Overnight , he lost his wealth . 
 Next , a freak storm took the lives of all his children . 
 Soon thereafter , he contracted a debilitating disease that left his whole body covered with painful boils . 
 You probably recognize that the man was Job , a key figure in the Bible book bearing his name . ​ — Job , chapters 1 and 2 . 
 “ O that I were as in the lunar months of long ago , ” he groaned . 
 When calamity strikes , who does not long for the former days ? 
 In Job’s case , he had lived a good life , seemingly sheltered from misfortune . 
 Prominent people respected him and sought his counsel . 
 He was wealthy , but he kept money in its proper place . 
 When he encountered widows or orphans in need , he helped them . 
 And he remained faithful to his wife . ​ — Job 31 : 1 , 9 , 11 . 
 How did Jehovah view Job ? 
 Job led a blameless life because he worshipped God . 
 “ There is no one like him in the earth , ” Jehovah said , “ a man blameless and upright , fearing God and turning aside from bad . ” 
 But despite Job’s moral integrity , tragedies ripped apart his comfortable lifestyle . 
 All he had worked for disappeared , and his true mettle was tested by pain , anguish , and frustration . 
 Why will it be helpful to consider Job’s ordeal ? 
 Of course , Job is by no means the only servant of God to have suffered a personal catastrophe . 
 Many Christians today can easily relate to his experience . 
 For this reason , two questions are well worth considering : How can remembering Job’s ordeal help us when we face tragedy ? 
 And how can it teach us to be more empathetic toward others who suffer ? 
 An Issue of Loyalty and a Test of Integrity 
 According to Satan , why was Job serving God ? 
 Job’s case was exceptional . 
 Unbeknownst to Job , the Devil had questioned Job’s motives for serving God . 
 When during a heavenly gathering Jehovah drew attention to Job’s fine qualities , Satan replied : “ Have not you yourself put up a hedge about him and about his house and about everything that he has all around ? ” 
 Satan thus claimed that selfishness motivated Job ​ — and by inference all other servants of God . 
 “ Thrust out your hand , please , and touch everything he has and see whether he will not curse you to your very face , ” Satan said to Jehovah . ​ — Job 1 : 8 - 11 . 
 What important issue did Satan raise ? 
 The issue was an important one . 
 Satan challenged the way Jehovah exercises his sovereignty . 
 Is it really possible for God to rule the universe by love ? 
 Or , as Satan implied , will selfishness always triumph in the end ? 
 Jehovah allowed the Devil to involve Job as a test case , confident in the integrity and loyalty of His servant . 
 Thus , Satan himself brought on the calamities that befell Job in rapid succession . 
 When Satan failed in his initial attacks , he afflicted Job with a painful disease . 
 “ Skin in behalf of skin , and everything that a man has he will give in behalf of his soul , ” the Devil alleged . ​ — Job 2 : 4 . 
 In what ways are God’s servants today subject to trials similar to those of Job ? 
 While most Christians today do not suffer to the extent that Job did , tribulations of different kinds do afflict them . 
 Many face persecution or family problems . 
 Economic hardship or ill health can be devastating . 
 Some have sacrificed their lives for their faith . 
 Of course , we must not assume that Satan personally causes each tragedy that we suffer . 
 Actually , some problems could even be caused by our own mistakes or by an inherited physical condition . 
 And all of us are subject to the ravages of old age and natural disasters . 
 The Bible makes clear that at the present time , Jehovah does not miraculously shield his servants from these afflictions . ​ — Ecclesiastes 9 : 11 . 
 How may Satan seek to use the tribulations we suffer ? 
 Nevertheless , Satan may use the tribulations we suffer to undermine our faith . 
 The apostle Paul mentioned being afflicted by “ a thorn in the flesh , an angel of Satan , ” that kept “ slapping ” him . 
 Whether this was a physical problem , such as poor eyesight , or something else , Paul understood that Satan could use the problem and resulting frustration to sap Paul of his joy and integrity . 
 Today , Satan may incite family members , schoolmates , or even dictatorial governments to persecute God’s servants in some way . 
 Why should adversity or persecution not unduly surprise us ? 
 How can we face these problems successfully ? 
 By viewing them as an opportunity to demonstrate that our love for Jehovah and our submission to his sovereignty are not fickle . 
 Whatever the cause of our distress , understanding the importance of loyalty to God will help us to maintain our spiritual balance . 
 The apostle Peter wrote to Christians : “ Beloved ones , do not be puzzled at the burning among you , which is happening to you for a trial , as though a strange thing were befalling you . ” 
 And Paul explained : “ All those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted . ” 
 Satan still challenges the integrity of the Witnesses of Jehovah , as he did in the case of Job . 
 In fact , the Bible indicates that Satan has increased his attacks on God’s people during these last days . ​ — Revelation 12 : 9 , 17 . 
 A Misunderstanding and Some Bad Advice 
 What disadvantage did Job suffer ? 
 Job suffered a disadvantage , one that we need not experience . 
 He did not know why these calamities had come upon him . 
 Job mistakenly concluded that in some way “ Jehovah himself [ had ] given , and Jehovah himself [ had ] taken away . ” 
 Possibly , Satan deliberately sought to give Job the impression that it was God who had caused his affliction . 
 Explain Job’s reaction to his calamities . 
 Job became profoundly discouraged , although he refused to curse God , as his wife urged him to do . 
 ‘ The wicked seem to fare much better than I do , ’ he said . 
 ‘ Why is God punishing me ? ’ 
 he must have wondered . 
 There were times when he just wanted to die . 
 “ O that in Sheol you would conceal me , that you would keep me secret until your anger turns back ! ” 
 he exclaimed . ​ — Job 14 : 13 . 
 12 , 13 . 
 How did the comments of Job’s three companions affect him ? 
 Job had three companions who visited him , as if to “ sympathize with him and comfort him . ” 
 Nevertheless , they proved to be “ troublesome comforters . ” 
 Job might have benefited from friends to whom he could unburden himself about his problems , but these three added to Job’s confusion and intensified his feelings of frustration . ​ — Job 19 : 2 ; 26 : 2 . 
 Understandably , Job might have asked himself : ‘ Why me ? 
 What have I done to deserve all this calamity ? ’ 
 His companions offered explanations that were totally misleading . 
 They assumed that Job had brought his suffering upon himself by committing some serious sin . 
 “ Who that is innocent has ever perished ? ” 
 asked Eliphaz . 
 “ According to what I have seen , those devising what is hurtful and those sowing trouble will themselves reap it . ” ​ — Job 4 : 7 , 8 . 
 Why should we not automatically equate suffering with improper conduct ? 
 Granted , problems may arise if we sow according to the flesh rather than the spirit . 
 Yet , in this present system , trouble can arise regardless of our conduct . 
 Furthermore , in no way can it be said that the innocent are spared all calamity . 
 Jesus Christ , who was “ undefiled , separated from the sinners , ” suffered a painful death on a torture stake , and the apostle James suffered a martyr’s death . 
 The faulty reasoning of Eliphaz and his two companions moved Job to defend his good name and insist on his innocence . 
 Still , their stubborn allegations that Job’s suffering was deserved may have influenced his view of God’s justice . ​ — Job 34 : 5 ; 35 : 2 . 
 Finding Help When Faced With Tribulation 
 What reasoning will help us in the face of suffering ? 
 Is there a lesson here for us ? 
 Tragedies , illness , or persecution may seem so unfair . 
 Other people appear to escape many of such problems . 
 At times , we may have to ask ourselves these fundamental questions : ‘ Does my love for God move me to serve him come what may ? 
 Do I long to give Jehovah “ a reply to the one who is taunting Him ? ” ’ 
 We must never allow the thoughtless comments of others to make us doubt our heavenly Father . 
 One faithful Christian who suffered from a chronic illness for many years once said : “ I know that whatever Jehovah permits , it will be all right . 
 I know he will give me the needed strength . 
 He always has . ” 
 How does God’s Word provide help to those facing hardships ? 
 With regard to Satan’s tactics , we have an understanding that Job did not have . 
 “ We are not ignorant of his designs , ” or evil schemes . 
 Furthermore , we have a wealth of practical wisdom on which to draw . 
 In the Bible , we find accounts of faithful men and women who endured all manner of hardships . 
 The apostle Paul , who suffered more than most , wrote : “ All the things that were written aforetime were written for our instruction , that through our endurance and through the comfort from the Scriptures we might have hope . ” 
 One Witness in Europe who was imprisoned for his faith during the second world war exchanged three days ’ rations for a Bible . 
 “ How rewarding that exchange proved to be ! ” 
 he says . 
 “ Despite my physical hunger , I received the spiritual food that helped sustain me as well as others in our trials during those troublous times . 
 I have kept that Bible to this day . ” 
 What divine provisions can help us to endure ? 
 Besides the comfort from the Scriptures , we have many Bible study aids that offer sound guidance for coping with problems . 
 If you consult the Watch Tower Publications Index , you will likely find an experience of a fellow Christian who has had a trial similar to your own . 
 It may also be helpful to discuss your circumstances with understanding elders or other mature Christians . 
 Above all , through prayer , you can count on help from Jehovah and his holy spirit . 
 How did Paul resist the ‘ slaps ’ of Satan ? 
 By learning to rely on the power of God . 
 “ For all things I have the strength by virtue of him who imparts power to me , ” he wrote . ​ — Philippians 4 : 13 . 
 How can fellow Christians offer invaluable encouragement ? 
 So help is available , and you should never hesitate to seek it . 
 “ Have you shown yourself discouraged in the day of distress ? 
 Your power will be scanty , ” the proverb notes . 
 Just as termites can cause a wooden house to topple , discouragement can undermine a Christian’s integrity . 
 To counteract this danger , Jehovah provides us with support through our fellow servants of God . 
 An angel appeared to Jesus and strengthened him on the night he was arrested . 
 While journeying toward Rome as a prisoner , Paul “ thanked God and took courage ” when he met the brothers at the Marketplace of Appius and Three Taverns . 
 A German Witness still remembers the help she received upon her arrival at Ravensbrück concentration camp as an apprehensive teenager . 
 “ A fellow Christian found me right away and gave me a hearty welcome , ” she recalls . 
 “ Another faithful sister took me under her wing , and she became like a spiritual mother to me . ” 
 “ Prove Yourself Faithful ” 
 What helped Job to resist Satan’s efforts ? 
 Jehovah described Job as a man who was “ holding fast his integrity . ” 
 Despite feeling discouraged and not understanding why he suffered , Job never wavered on the vital issue of loyalty . 
 Job refused to deny everything for which he had lived . 
 He insisted : “ Until I expire I shall not take away my integrity from myself ! ” ​ — Job 27 : 5 . 
 Why is endurance worthwhile ? 
 Similar determination will help us to maintain our integrity under any circumstances ​ — in the face of temptations , opposition , or adversity . 
 “ Do not be afraid of the things you are about to suffer , ” Jesus told the congregation in Smyrna . 
 “ Look ! 
 The Devil will keep on throwing some of you into prison that you may be fully put to the test , and that you may have tribulation [ trouble , distress , or oppression ] ten days . 
 Prove yourself faithful even to death , and I will give you the crown of life . ” ​ — Revelation 2 : 10 . 
 21 , 22 . 
 When enduring tribulation , we can be comforted by what knowledge ? 
 In this system ruled by Satan , our endurance and integrity will be put to the test . 
 Nevertheless , Jesus assures us that as we look to the future , we have no reason to fear . 
 The important thing is to prove ourselves faithful . 
 “ The tribulation is momentary , ” said Paul , whereas the “ glory , ” or reward that Jehovah promises us , “ is of more and more surpassing weight and is everlasting . ” 
 Even Job’s tribulation was momentary when compared with the many happy years he enjoyed before and after his trial . ​ — Job 42 : 16 . 
 Still , there may be moments in our lives when our trials seem unending and our suffering seems almost unbearable . 
 In the following article , we will consider how Job’s experience can teach us additional lessons in endurance . 
 We will also look at ways in which we can strengthen others who face adversity . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • What fundamental issue did Satan raise concerning Job’s integrity ? 
 • Why should adversity not unduly surprise us ? 
 • How does Jehovah help us to endure ? 
 [ Pictures on page 23 ] 
 Doing research , talking with mature Christians , and pouring out our heart in prayer can help us to endure 
 Show Love and Respect by Controlling Your Tongue 
 “ Let each one of you individually so love his wife as he does himself ; on the other hand , the wife should have deep respect for her husband . ” ​ — EPHESIANS 5 : 33 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What important question should all married people ask themselves , and why ? 
 SUPPOSE you received a gift - wrapped package with a label that read : “ Handle With Care . ” 
 How would you treat that package ? 
 Surely you would take every precaution to avoid damaging it . 
 What about the gift of marriage ? 
 To the young women Orpah and Ruth , the Israelite widow Naomi said : “ May Jehovah make a gift to you , and do you find a resting - place each one in the house of her husband . ” 
 Concerning a good wife , the Bible says : “ The inheritance from fathers is a house and wealth , but a discreet wife is from Jehovah . ” 
 If you are married , you need to view your mate as a gift from God . 
 How are you treating the gift that God has given you ? 
 What admonition of Paul do husbands and wives do well to heed ? 
 Writing to Christians in the first century , the apostle Paul said : “ Let each one of you individually so love his wife as he does himself ; on the other hand , the wife should have deep respect for her husband . ” 
 Consider how husbands and wives can heed this admonition with regard to their speech . 
 Beware of “ an Unruly Injurious Thing ” 
 How can the tongue be a force for good or for bad ? 
 The Bible writer James says that the tongue is “ an unruly injurious thing ” that “ is full of death - dealing poison . ” 
 James was aware of this vital truth : An unruly tongue is destructive . 
 Undoubtedly , he was familiar with the Bible proverb that compares thoughtless words to “ the stabs of a sword . ” 
 In contrast , the same proverb says that “ the tongue of the wise ones is a healing . ” 
 Indeed , words can have a powerful effect . 
 They can hurt , or they can heal . 
 What effect do your words have on your marriage mate ? 
 If you asked your spouse this , how would he or she answer ? 
 5 , 6 . 
 What factors make it difficult for some to restrain the tongue ? 
 If hurtful speech has crept into your marriage , you can change the situation for the better . 
 However , effort will be required . 
 Why ? 
 For one thing , there is the imperfect flesh to contend with . 
 Inherited sin exerts a negative influence on the way we think about and speak to one another . 
 “ If anyone does not stumble in word , ” James wrote , “ this one is a perfect man , able to bridle also his whole body . ” ​ — James 3 : 2 . 
 In addition to human imperfection , family environment plays a role in the misuse of the tongue . 
 Some people were raised in homes where parents were “ not open to any agreement , . . . without self - control , fierce . ” 
 Often , children who grow up in such an environment display similar traits when they become adults . 
 Of course , neither imperfection nor deficient upbringing provides an excuse for harmful speech . 
 Being aware of these factors , though , helps us to understand why restraining the tongue from speaking what is injurious is particularly challenging for some . 
 ‘ Put Away Backbiting ’ 
 What did Peter mean when he admonished Christians to “ put away . . . all sorts of backbiting ” ? 
 Regardless of the cause , using hurtful speech in marriage could indicate a lack of love and respect for one’s spouse . 
 For good reason , Peter admonished Christians to “ put away . . . all sorts of backbiting . ” 
 The Greek word translated “ backbiting ” means “ insulting language . ” 
 It conveys the idea of ‘ shooting people with words . ’ 
 How well that describes the effects of an unruly tongue ! 
 8 , 9 . 
 What can result from using insulting speech , and why should marriage mates avoid doing so ? 
 Insulting speech may not seem so serious , but consider what happens when a husband or a wife uses such speech . 
 Calling one’s mate stupid , lazy , or selfish implies that his or her entire character can be summed up by a label ​ — a demeaning one at that ! 
 This is surely cruel . 
 And what about sweeping assertions that highlight a mate’s flaws ? 
 Are not such statements as “ You’re always late ” or “ You never listen to me ” really exaggerations ? 
 They are bound to elicit a defensive response . 
 That , in turn , may trigger a heated argument . ​ — James 3 : 5 . 
 Conversation that is laced with insulting speech puts a strain on a marriage , and this too can have dire consequences . 
 Proverbs 25 : 24 says : “ Better is it to dwell upon a corner of a roof than with a contentious wife , although in a house in common . ” 
 Of course , the same can be said of a contentious husband . 
 Over time , cutting words from either mate will erode a relationship , perhaps causing a husband or a wife to feel unloved , even unlovable . 
 Clearly , it is important to restrain the tongue . 
 But how can this be done ? 
 ‘ Bridle the Tongue ’ 
 Why is it important to control the tongue ? 
 “ The tongue , ” states James 3 : 8 , “ not one of mankind can get it tamed . ” 
 Nevertheless , just as a rider bridles a horse to control the animal’s movements , we should do our best to bridle our tongue . 
 “ If any man seems to himself to be a formal worshiper and yet does not bridle his tongue , but goes on deceiving his own heart , this man’s form of worship is futile . ” 
 These words show that how you use your tongue is a serious matter . 
 It affects more than your relationship with your mate ; it affects your very relationship with Jehovah God . ​ — 1 Peter 3 : 7 . 
 How might it be possible to prevent a disagreement from escalating into a heated argument ? 
 You are wise to take note of how you speak to your mate . 
 If a stressful situation develops , try to defuse the tension . 
 Consider a situation that arose in the life of Isaac and his wife , Rebekah , as recorded at Genesis 27 : 46 – 28 : 4 . 
 “ Rebekah kept saying to Isaac : ‘ I have come to abhor this life of mine because of the daughters of Heth . 
 If Jacob ever takes a wife from the daughters of Heth like these from the daughters of the land , of what good is life to me ? ’ ” 
 There is no indication that Isaac responded harshly . 
 Instead , he sent their son Jacob away to find a God - fearing wife who was not likely to become a source of distress to Rebekah . 
 Suppose that a disagreement arises between a husband and his wife . 
 A subtle shift from “ you ” to “ I ” can prevent a minor disagreement from escalating into a heated argument . 
 For example , instead of saying , “ You never spend time with me ! ” 
 why not say , “ I wish we could spend more time together ” ? 
 Focus on the problem , not just the person . 
 Resist the tendency to analyze who is right and who is wrong . 
 “ Pursue the things making for peace and the things that are upbuilding to one another , ” says Romans 14 : 19 . 
 Put Away ‘ Malicious Bitterness , Anger , and Wrath ’ 
 To control the tongue , for what should we pray , and why ? 
 More is involved in restraining the tongue than watching what we say . 
 After all , our words are a product of the heart rather than of the mouth . 
 Jesus said : “ A good man brings forth good out of the good treasure of his heart , but a wicked man brings forth what is wicked out of his wicked treasure ; for out of the heart’s abundance his mouth speaks . ” 
 Hence , to control your tongue , you may need to pray as did David : “ Create in me even a pure heart , O God , and put within me a new spirit , a steadfast one . ” ​ — Psalm 51 : 10 . 
 How can malicious bitterness , anger , and wrath lead to abusive speech ? 
 Paul urged the Ephesians to avoid not only the hurtful words but also the feelings behind them . 
 He wrote : “ Let all malicious bitterness and anger and wrath and screaming and abusive speech be taken away from you along with all badness . ” 
 Note that before citing “ screaming and abusive speech , ” Paul mentioned “ malicious bitterness and anger and wrath . ” 
 It is the rage that boils within that threatens to erupt in an outburst of hurtful speech . 
 So ask yourself : ‘ Do I harbor bitterness and wrath in my heart ? 
 Am I “ disposed to rage ” ? ’ 
 If this is true in your case , pray for God’s help to overcome these tendencies and to exercise self - control so that you can avoid letting your anger erupt . 
 Psalm 4 : 4 says : “ Be agitated , but do not sin . 
 Have your say in your heart , upon your bed , and keep silent . ” 
 If tempers threaten to flare and you fear that you will lose self - control , follow the admonition of Proverbs 17 : 14 : “ Before the quarrel has burst forth , take your leave . ” 
 Momentarily step away from the situation until the danger passes . 
 How can resentment affect a marriage ? 
 It is not easy to deal with wrath and anger , especially when it stems from what Paul called “ malicious bitterness . ” 
 The Greek word that Paul used has been defined as characterizing a “ resentful spirit which refuses reconciliation ” and a ‘ spite that keeps a score of wrongs . ’ 
 Sometimes hostility hangs like a dense fog between a husband and his wife , and the condition may persist for a long time . 
 Cold disdain may result when a grievance has not been fully resolved . 
 But harboring resentment for past wrongs is futile . 
 What has happened cannot be undone . 
 A wrong that has been forgiven should be forgotten . 
 Love “ does not keep account of the injury . ” ​ — 1 Corinthians 13 : 4 , 5 . 
 What will help those accustomed to using harsh words to change their manner of speaking ? 
 What if harsh language was common in the family in which you were raised and using it has become your custom ? 
 You can make changes in this regard . 
 You have already set limits in a number of areas of life in which you will just not allow yourself to act in a certain way . 
 Where will you choose to set the boundary when it comes to your speech ? 
 Will you stop before your words become abusive ? 
 You will want to adopt the limit described at Ephesians 4 : 29 : “ Let a rotten saying not proceed out of your mouth . ” 
 This requires that you “ strip off the old personality with its practices , and clothe [ yourself ] with the new personality , which through accurate knowledge is being made new according to the image of the One who created it . ” ​ — Colossians 3 : 9 , 10 . 
 “ Confidential Talk ” ​ — A Must 
 Why is the silent treatment damaging to a marriage ? 
 Little is accomplished ​ — and damage can result — ​ when a husband or a wife resorts to what has been called the silent treatment . 
 This is not always a matter of punishing one’s partner , as it may result from frustration or discouragement . 
 Yet , refusing to talk to each other only heightens tension and does little to solve the problem at hand . 
 As one wife put it , “ once we do start talking again , we never discuss the problem . ” 
 What should be done by Christians experiencing marital stress ? 
 When marital tension persists , there is no shortcut . 
 Proverbs 15 : 22 states : “ There is a frustrating of plans where there is no confidential talk , but in the multitude of counselors there is accomplishment . ” 
 You need to sit down with your spouse and discuss the matter . 
 By all means , listen to your mate with an open mind and heart . 
 If it seems impossible to do so , why not take advantage of the provision of elders in the Christian congregation ? 
 They have knowledge of the Scriptures and are experienced in applying Bible principles . 
 Such men are “ like a hiding place from the wind and a place of concealment from the rainstorm . ” ​ — Isaiah 32 : 2 . 
 You Can Win the Battle 
 What struggle is described at Romans 7 : 18 - 23 ? 
 Bridling our tongue is a struggle . 
 So is controlling our actions . 
 Describing the challenge that he faced , the apostle Paul wrote : “ I know that in me , that is , in my flesh , there dwells nothing good ; for ability to wish is present with me , but ability to work out what is fine is not present . 
 For the good that I wish I do not do , but the bad that I do not wish is what I practice . 
 If , now , what I do not wish is what I do , the one working it out is no longer I , but the sin dwelling in me . ” 
 Because of “ sin’s law that is in [ our ] members , ” we are inclined to misuse our tongue and other parts of the body . 
 However , the battle must be fought ​ — and it can be won with God’s help . 
 19 , 20 . 
 How can Jesus ’ example help husbands and wives to bridle their tongue ? 
 In a relationship that is characterized by love and respect , there is no room for thoughtless , harsh words . 
 Think of the example that Jesus Christ set in this regard . 
 Jesus never used insulting speech with his disciples . 
 Even on the last night of his life on earth when his apostles were arguing over who among them was the greatest , the Son of God did not scold them . 
 “ Husbands , ” admonishes the Bible , “ continue loving your wives , just as the Christ also loved the congregation and delivered up himself for it . ” ​ — Ephesians 5 : 25 . 
 What , though , about a wife ? 
 She “ should have deep respect for her husband . ” 
 Would a wife who respects her husband scream at him , using abusive speech ? 
 “ I want you to know that the head of every man is the Christ , ” wrote Paul , “ in turn the head of a woman is the man ; in turn the head of the Christ is God . ” 
 Wives are to be in subjection to their head as the Christ is to his Head . 
 Although no imperfect human can perfectly imitate Jesus , striving to “ follow his steps closely ” will help husbands and wives to win the battle against misuse of the tongue . ​ — 1 Peter 2 : 21 . 
 What Did You Learn ? 
 • How can an unruly tongue damage a marriage ? 
 • Why is the tongue difficult to bridle ? 
 • What helps us to control our speech ? 
 • What should you do when experiencing marital stress ? 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 Elders provide Bible - based help 
 Do You Share Jehovah’s View of Sacred Things ? 
 “ Carefully watching . . . that there may be no fornicator nor anyone not appreciating sacred things . ” ​ — HEBREWS 12 : 15 , 16 . 
 What current attitude is not shared by Jehovah’s servants ? 
 THE world in general pays less and less attention to sacred things . 
 French sociologist Edgar Morin stated : “ All the foundations upon which morals are based ​ — God , nature , homeland , history , reason — ​ have lost their unquestionable nature . . . . 
 People pick and choose their values . ” 
 This reflects “ the spirit of the world , ” or “ the spirit that now operates in the sons of disobedience . ” 
 That irreverent spirit is not shared by those who have dedicated themselves to Jehovah and who willingly submit to his rightful sovereignty . 
 Rather , God’s servants realize the vital place that sacredness , or holiness , has in their worship of Jehovah . 
 What things in our life should be sacred ? 
 This article will consider five things that are holy to all of God’s servants . 
 The next article will focus on the sacredness of our Christian meetings . 
 But what does the word “ holy ” really mean ? 
 2 , 3 . ( a ) How do the Scriptures highlight Jehovah’s holiness ? 
 ( b ) How do we hold Jehovah’s name as something holy ? 
 In Biblical Hebrew , the word “ holy ” conveys the thought of separateness . 
 In worship , “ holy ” applies to that which is separated from common use , or held sacred . 
 Jehovah is holy in the absolute sense . 
 He is called “ the Most Holy One . ” 
 In ancient Israel , the high priest wore fastened to his turban a gold plate engraved with the words “ Holiness belongs to Jehovah . ” 
 Heavenly cherubs and seraphs stationed about Jehovah’s throne are depicted in the Scriptures as proclaiming : “ Holy , holy , holy is Jehovah . ” 
 This repetition emphasizes that Jehovah is holy , clean , and pure to the superlative degree . 
 He is , in fact , the Source of all holiness . 
 Jehovah’s name is sacred , or holy . 
 The psalmist exclaimed : “ Let them laud your name . 
 Great and fear - inspiring , holy it is . ” 
 Jesus taught us to pray : “ Our Father in the heavens , let your name be sanctified [ or , “ be held sacred ; be treated as holy , ” footnote ] . ” 
 Jesus ’ earthly mother , Mary , proclaimed : “ My soul magnifies Jehovah . . . the powerful One has done great deeds for me , and holy is his name . ” 
 As servants of Jehovah , we hold his name as something holy and avoid doing anything that might bring reproach upon that holy name . 
 Furthermore , we share Jehovah’s view of sacredness , that is , we consider sacred the things that he holds sacred . ​ — Amos 5 : 14 , 15 . 
 Why We Have Deep Respect for Jesus 
 Why does the Bible describe Jesus as “ the Holy One ” ? 
 As the “ only - begotten son ” of the holy God , Jehovah , Jesus was created holy . 
 He is therefore called “ the Holy One of God . ” 
 He retained his holiness when his life was transferred from heaven to earth , for it was under the power of the holy spirit that Mary gave birth to Jesus . 
 An angel had told her : “ Holy spirit will come upon you . . . what is born will be called holy , God’s Son . ” 
 In prayer to Jehovah , Christians in Jerusalem twice referred to God’s Son as “ your holy servant Jesus . ” ​ — Acts 4 : 27 , 30 . 
 What sacred mission did Jesus fulfill on earth , and why is his blood precious ? 
 Jesus had a sacred mission to fulfill while on earth . 
 At his baptism in 29 C.E . , Jesus was anointed as High Priest of Jehovah’s great spiritual temple . 
 In addition , he was to die a sacrificial death . 
 His shed blood would provide the ransom through which human sinners could be saved . 
 We therefore hold Jesus ’ blood as something sacred , “ precious . ” ​ — 1 Peter 1 : 19 . 
 What is our attitude toward Christ Jesus , and why ? 
 Showing that we hold our King and High Priest , Christ Jesus , in deep respect , the apostle Paul wrote : “ God exalted [ his Son ] to a superior position and kindly gave him the name that is above every other name , so that in the name of Jesus every knee should bend of those in heaven and those on earth and those under the ground , and every tongue should openly acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father . ” 
 We demonstrate that we share Jehovah’s view of sacred things by joyfully submitting ourselves to our Leader and reigning King , Christ Jesus , the Head of the Christian congregation . ​ — Matthew 23 : 10 ; Colossians 1 : 18 . 
 How do we show our submission to Christ ? 
 Submission to Christ also involves our showing proper respect for the men used by him to take the lead in the work he is now directing . 
 The role of the spirit - anointed ones who make up the Governing Body and of the overseers appointed by them in the branches , districts , circuits , and congregations should be recognized as a sacred responsibility . 
 This arrangement therefore commands our deep respect and submission . ​ — Hebrews 13 : 7 , 17 . 
 A Holy People 
 8 , 9 . ( a ) In what way were the Israelites a holy people ? 
 ( b ) How did Jehovah impress on the Israelites the principle of sacredness ? 
 Jehovah made a covenant with Israel . 
 This relationship conferred upon that new nation a special status . 
 They were sanctified , or set apart . 
 Jehovah himself told them : “ You must prove yourselves holy to me , because I Jehovah am holy ; and I am proceeding to divide you off from the peoples to become mine . ” ​ — Leviticus 19 : 2 ; 20 : 26 . 
 At the very founding of the nation of Israel , Jehovah impressed upon the Israelites the principle of sacredness . 
 Under pain of death , they were not even to touch the mountain where the Ten Commandments were given . 
 Mount Sinai was then in a sense considered sacred . 
 The priesthood , the tabernacle , and its furnishings were also to be held sacred . 
 What is the situation in the Christian congregation ? 
 10 , 11 . 
 Why can it be said that the Christian congregation of anointed ones is sacred , and what effect does this have on the “ other sheep ” ? 
 The Christian congregation of anointed ones is sacred in Jehovah’s eyes . 
 In fact , the entire group of anointed Christians on earth at any one time is likened to a holy temple , although they do not constitute Jehovah’s great spiritual temple . 
 Jehovah inhabits that temple by means of his holy spirit . 
 The apostle Paul wrote : “ In union with [ Christ Jesus ] the whole building , being harmoniously joined together , is growing into a holy temple for Jehovah . 
 In union with him you , too , are being built up together into a place for God to inhabit by spirit . ” ​ — Ephesians 2 : 21 , 22 ; 1 Peter 2 : 5 , 9 . 
 Paul further wrote to anointed Christians : “ Do you not know that you people are God’s temple , and that the spirit of God dwells in you ? . . . 
 The temple of God is holy , which temple you people are . ” 
 By means of his spirit , Jehovah ‘ resides ’ among the anointed and ‘ walks among them . ’ 
 He continually guides his faithful “ slave . ” 
 The “ other sheep ” cherish their privilege of being associated with the “ temple ” class . ​ — John 10 : 16 ; Matthew 25 : 37 - 40 . 
 Sacred Things in Our Christian Lives 
 What things are sacred in our lives , and why ? 
 Not surprisingly , many things related to the lives of anointed members of the Christian congregation and their companions are held sacred . 
 Our relationship with Jehovah is something sacred . 
 It is so precious to us that we allow nothing and no one to come between us and our God , Jehovah . 
 Prayer plays an important part in our maintaining a close relationship with Jehovah . 
 Prayer was so sacred to the prophet Daniel that even at the risk of his life , he continued faithful in his custom of praying to Jehovah . 
 “ The prayers of the holy ones , ” or anointed Christians , are likened to incense used in temple worship . 
 This symbolism underscores the sacredness of prayer . 
 What a privilege it is to be able to communicate with the Sovereign of the universe ! 
 No wonder prayer is held sacred in our lives ! 
 What force is holy , and how should we allow it to operate in our lives ? 
 There is a force in the lives of anointed Christians and their companions that they by all means hold sacred ​ — holy spirit . 
 That spirit is Jehovah’s active force , and since it always acts in harmony with the will of the holy God , it is properly called “ holy spirit , ” or “ the spirit of holiness . ” 
 By means of holy spirit , Jehovah provides his servants the power to preach the good news . 
 Jehovah gives his spirit to “ those obeying him as ruler , ” to those who “ keep walking by spirit , ” not according to fleshly desires . 
 This powerful force enables Christians to produce “ the fruitage of the spirit ” ​ — fine qualities — ​ and “ holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion . ” 
 If the holy spirit is something sacred to us , we will avoid doing anything that might grieve that spirit , or obstruct its action in our lives . ​ — Ephesians 4 : 30 . 
 What privilege do the anointed hold as sacred , and how is this privilege shared by the other sheep ? 
 The privilege we have of bearing the name of the holy God , Jehovah , and of being his Witnesses is something else that we hold sacred . 
 Anointed Christians have been qualified by Jehovah “ to be ministers of a new covenant . ” 
 As such , they are commissioned to preach “ this good news of the kingdom ” and to “ make disciples of people of all the nations . ” 
 They are faithfully carrying out this commission , and millions of sheeplike people are responding , symbolically saying to the anointed : “ We will go with you people , for we have heard that God is with you people . ” 
 These joyfully serve in a spiritual sense as “ farmers ” and “ vinedressers ” for the anointed “ ministers of our God . ” 
 In that way , the other sheep greatly assist the anointed ones in accomplishing their ministry on a worldwide scale . ​ — Isaiah 61 : 5 , 6 . 
 What activity did the apostle Paul hold sacred , and why do we have the same view ? 
 The apostle Paul , for one , considered his public ministry to be something sacred , or holy . 
 He spoke of himself as “ a public servant of Christ Jesus to the nations , engaging in the holy work of the good news of God . ” 
 Writing to Christians in Corinth , Paul referred to his ministry as a “ treasure . ” 
 Through our public ministry , we make known “ the sacred pronouncements of God . ” 
 Therefore , whether of the anointed or of the other sheep , we consider it a sacred privilege to share in the work of bearing witness . 
 “ Perfecting Holiness in God’s Fear ” 
 What will help us to avoid becoming people “ not appreciating sacred things ” ? 
 The apostle Paul warned his fellow Christians against becoming people “ not appreciating sacred things . ” 
 Rather , he counseled them to ‘ pursue sanctification , ’ “ carefully watching . . . that no poisonous root may spring up and cause trouble and that many may not be defiled by it . ” 
 The expression “ poisonous root ” refers to those few in the Christian congregation who may find fault with the way things are done . 
 For instance , they might disagree with Jehovah’s views on the sacredness of marriage or the need for moral cleanness . 
 Or they might share in apostate talk , “ empty speeches that violate what is holy , ” proffered by those who “ have deviated from the truth . ” ​ — 2 Timothy 2 : 16 - 18 . 
 Why is constant effort required on the part of the anointed to reflect Jehovah’s view of holiness ? 
 To his anointed brothers , Paul wrote : “ Beloved ones , let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit , perfecting holiness in God’s fear . ” 
 This statement shows that anointed Christians , “ partakers of the heavenly calling , ” must put forth constant effort to prove that they reflect Jehovah’s view of holiness in every aspect of their lives . 
 Similarly , the apostle Peter exhorted his spirit - begotten brothers : “ As obedient children , quit being fashioned according to the desires you formerly had in your ignorance , but , in accord with the Holy One who called you , do you also become holy yourselves in all your conduct . ” ​ — 1 Peter 1 : 14 , 15 . 
 18 , 19 . ( a ) How do the members of the “ great crowd ” show that they share Jehovah’s view of sacred things ? 
 ( b ) What other sacred feature of our Christian lives will be considered in the following article ? 
 What of the members of the “ great crowd , ” who will survive “ the great tribulation ” ? 
 They too must prove that they share Jehovah’s view of sacred things . 
 In the book of Revelation , they are represented as rendering Jehovah “ sacred service ” in the earthly courtyard of his spiritual temple . 
 They have put faith in Christ’s ransom sacrifice , symbolically ‘ washing their robes and making them white in the blood of the Lamb . ’ 
 This gives them a clean standing before Jehovah and places them under obligation to “ cleanse [ themselves ] of every defilement of flesh and spirit , perfecting holiness in God’s fear . ” 
 An important feature in the lives of anointed Christians and their companions is that of regularly meeting to worship Jehovah and study his Word . 
 Jehovah considers gatherings of his people as something sacred . 
 How and why we should share Jehovah’s view of sacred things in this vital area will be considered in the following article . 
 By Way of Review 
 • What worldly view is not shared by Jehovah’s servants ? 
 • Why is Jehovah the Source of all that is holy ? 
 • How do we show that we respect Christ’s holiness ? 
 • What things should we hold sacred in our lives ? 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 In ancient Israel , the priesthood , the tabernacle , and its furnishings were to be held sacred 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 Anointed Christians on earth form a holy temple 
 [ Pictures on page 25 ] 
 Prayer and our public ministry are sacred privileges 
 Showing Respect for Our Sacred Gatherings 
 “ I will also bring them to my holy mountain and make them rejoice inside my house of prayer . ” ​ — ISAIAH 56 : 7 . 
 What Scriptural reasons do we have for showing proper respect for our meetings ? 
 JEHOVAH has gathered his people , anointed Christians and their companions , to worship him at his “ holy mountain . ” 
 He is making them rejoice inside his “ house of prayer , ” his spiritual temple , which is “ a house of prayer for all the nations . ” 
 These developments indicate that Jehovah’s worship is holy , pure , and elevated . 
 By showing proper respect for our meetings for study and worship , we prove that we share Jehovah’s view of sacred things . 
 What indicates that Jehovah held as sacred the place he chose for his worship , and how did Jesus show that he too did so ? 
 In ancient Israel , the place that Jehovah chose for his worship was to be held sacred . 
 The tabernacle and its furnishings and utensils were to be anointed and sanctified ‘ that they might indeed become most holy . ’ 
 The two compartments of the sanctuary were called “ the Holy Place ” and “ the Most Holy . ” 
 The tabernacle was later replaced by the temple in Jerusalem . 
 As the seat of Jehovah’s worship , Jerusalem was called “ the holy city . ” 
 During his earthly ministry , Jesus himself showed due respect for the temple . 
 He was incensed at the people for the disrespectful way that they used the temple area for commercial purposes and as a shortcut . ​ — Mark 11 : 15 , 16 . 
 What illustrates the sacred nature of Israel’s assemblies ? 
 The Israelites assembled regularly to worship Jehovah and to listen to the reading of his Law . 
 Certain days of their festivals were called holy conventions or solemn assemblies , indicating the sacred nature of these gatherings . 
 At a public assembly in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah , the Levites “ were explaining the law to the people . ” 
 Since “ all the people were weeping as they were hearing the words of the law , ” the Levites “ were ordering all the people to be silent , saying : ‘ Keep quiet ! 
 for this day is holy . ’ ” 
 The Israelites then celebrated the seven - day Festival of Booths with “ very great rejoicing . ” 
 Furthermore , “ there was a reading aloud of the book of the law of the true God day by day , from the first day until the last day ; and they went on holding the festival seven days , and on the eighth day there was a solemn assembly , according to the rule . ” 
 These were truly holy occasions requiring respectful attention on the part of those in attendance . 
 Our Meetings Are Sacred Gatherings 
 4 , 5 . 
 What features of our meetings prove that they are sacred gatherings ? 
 True , today Jehovah has no literal holy city on earth , with a special temple dedicated to his worship . 
 Nevertheless , we should not lose sight of the fact that meetings for the worship of Jehovah are sacred gatherings . 
 Three times a week , we meet in order to read and study the Scriptures . 
 Jehovah’s Word is “ expounded , ” and as in Nehemiah’s time , there is “ a putting of meaning into it . ” 
 All our meetings begin and end with prayer , and at most of them , we sing songs of praise to Jehovah . 
 The congregation meetings are truly a part of our worship and call for a prayerful attitude and respectful attention on our part . 
 Jehovah blesses his people as they meet together to worship him , study his Word , and enjoy sweet Christian fellowship . 
 When the time comes to attend a meeting , we can be sure that it is there that ‘ Jehovah commands the blessing to be . ’ 
 We share in that blessing if we are present and attentively follow the spiritual program . 
 Moreover , Jesus stated : “ Where there are two or three gathered together in my name , there I am in their midst . ” 
 In context , this statement applies to Christian elders who are meeting to handle serious problems between individuals , but in principle , it also applies to our meetings . 
 If Christ , by means of holy spirit , is present when Christians meet together in his name , should not such gatherings be considered sacred ? 
 What can be said of our meeting places , both large and small ? 
 It is true that Jehovah does not dwell in man - made temples . 
 Nevertheless , our Kingdom Halls are places of true worship . 
 We meet there to study Jehovah’s Word , pray to him , and sing his praises . 
 That is also true of our Assembly Halls . 
 Larger facilities rented for our conventions ​ — such as auditoriums , exhibition halls , or sports stadiums — ​ become places of worship while being used for our sacred gatherings . 
 These occasions for worship , large and small , deserve our respect , and that should be reflected in our attitude and behavior . 
 Ways to Show Respect for Our Gatherings 
 In what tangible way can we show respect for our gatherings ? 
 There are tangible ways that we can show respect for our gatherings . 
 One way is by being present for the singing of Kingdom songs . 
 Many of these are worded as prayers and should therefore be sung reverentially . 
 Quoting Psalm 22 , the apostle Paul wrote of Jesus : “ I will declare your name to my brothers ; in the middle of the congregation I will praise you with song . ” 
 Hence , we should make it a point to be in our seats before the chairman introduces the song and then to concentrate on the meaning of the words while singing . 
 May our singing reflect the feelings of the psalmist who wrote : “ I shall laud Jehovah with all my heart in the intimate group of upright ones and the assembly . ” 
 Yes , singing praises to Jehovah is one very good reason to arrive early at our meetings and to stay until the end . 
 What example in the Bible shows that prayers at our meetings merit our respectful attention ? 
 Another feature that spiritually enhances all our meetings is heartfelt prayer offered on behalf of all those assembled . 
 On one occasion , first - century Christians in Jerusalem met together and “ with one accord raised their voices to God ” in fervent prayer . 
 As a result , they continued ​ — in spite of persecution — ​ “ speaking the word of God with boldness . ” 
 Can we imagine any of those present letting their mind wander during that prayer ? 
 No , they prayed “ with one accord . ” 
 Prayers uttered at our meetings reflect the feelings of all in attendance . 
 They merit our respectful attention . 
 How can we show our respect for sacred gatherings by our dress and behavior ? 
 Furthermore , we can show how deeply we respect the sacred nature of our gatherings by the way we dress . 
 Our appearance with respect to both our clothing and our hairstyle can do much to add to the dignity of our meetings . 
 The apostle Paul counseled : “ I desire that in every place the men carry on prayer , lifting up loyal hands , apart from wrath and debates . 
 Likewise I desire the women to adorn themselves in well - arranged dress , with modesty and soundness of mind , not with styles of hair braiding and gold or pearls or very expensive garb , but in the way that befits women professing to reverence God . ” 
 When we attend large conventions held in open - air stadiums , our dress can be appropriate to the weather conditions and still be dignified . 
 In addition , our respect for the occasion will lead us to refrain from eating or chewing gum during the sessions . 
 Proper dress and behavior at our gatherings honor Jehovah God , his worship , and our fellow worshippers . 
 Conduct Befitting God’s Household 
 How did the apostle Paul show that a high standard of conduct is required at our Christian meetings ? 
 In 1 Corinthians , chapter 14 , we find the apostle Paul’s wise counsel on how Christian meetings should be conducted . 
 He concluded by saying : “ Let all things take place decently and by arrangement . ” 
 Our meetings are an important part of the activity of the Christian congregation , and they require a level of conduct that befits Jehovah’s household . 
 11 , 12 . ( a ) What should be impressed upon the minds of children who attend our meetings ? 
 ( b ) In what appropriate way can children express their faith at our meetings ? 
 Children , in particular , need to be taught how to behave at our meetings . 
 Christian parents should explain to their children that the Kingdom Hall and the Congregation Book Study location are not places to play . 
 They are places where we worship Jehovah and study his Word . 
 Wise King Solomon wrote : “ Guard your feet whenever you go to the house of the true God ; and let there be a drawing near to hear . ” 
 Moses taught the Israelites to assemble together adults and “ little ones . ” 
 He said : “ Congregate the people . . . in order that they may listen and in order that they may learn , as they must fear Jehovah your God and take care to carry out all the words of this law . 
 And their sons who have not known should listen , and they must learn to fear Jehovah . ” ​ — Deuteronomy 31 : 12 , 13 . 
 Similarly today , our young ones attend meetings with their parents primarily to listen and to learn . 
 Once they are able to follow along and to understand at least basic Bible truths , children can also make a “ public declaration ” of their faith by participating with brief comments . 
 A young child may start by saying a few words in answer to a question he understands . 
 At first , he may have to read the answer , but in time , he will try to express himself in his own words . 
 This is beneficial and enjoyable for the child , and such spontaneous expressions of faith delight the hearts of older ones in attendance . 
 Naturally , parents set the example by giving comments themselves . 
 Where possible , it is good for children to have their own Bible , songbook , and copy of the publication that is being studied . 
 They should learn to show proper respect for such publications . 
 All of this will impress on the minds of the children that our meetings are sacred gatherings . 
 What is our hope with regard to those attending our meetings for the first time ? 
 Of course , we do not want our meetings to resemble Christendom’s church services . 
 These can be either cold and sanctimonious or boisterous like rock concerts . 
 We want the meetings at our Kingdom Halls to be warm and inviting but not to the point of resembling a neighborhood social club . 
 We meet in order to worship Jehovah , so our meetings should always be dignified . 
 Our desire is that after listening to the material presented and observing our behavior and that of our children , those attending for the first time will say : “ God is really among you . ” ​ — 1 Corinthians 14 : 25 . 
 A Permanent Feature of Our Worship 
 14 , 15 . ( a ) How can we avoid ‘ neglecting the house of our God ’ ? 
 ( b ) How is Isaiah 66 : 23 already being fulfilled ? 
 As stated before , Jehovah is gathering his people and making them rejoice inside his “ house of prayer , ” his spiritual temple . 
 The faithful man Nehemiah reminded his fellow Jews that they should show proper respect for the literal temple by supporting it materially . 
 He stated : “ We should not neglect the house of our God . ” 
 Furthermore , we should not neglect Jehovah’s invitation to worship him inside his “ house of prayer . ” 
 Showing the need for regularity in meeting together to worship , Isaiah prophesied : “ ‘ It will certainly occur that from new moon to new moon and from sabbath to sabbath all flesh will come in to bow down before me , ’ Jehovah has said . ” 
 This is happening today . 
 Regularly , every week of every month , dedicated Christians come together to worship Jehovah . 
 They do this by , among other things , attending Christian meetings and engaging in the public ministry . 
 Are you one of those who regularly ‘ come and bow down before Jehovah ’ ? 
 Why should regular meeting attendance be a permanent feature of our lives now ? 
 Isaiah 66 : 23 will fully apply to life in Jehovah’s promised new world . 
 At that time , “ all flesh will , ” in a literal sense , week by week and month by month , “ come in to bow down before , ” or worship , Jehovah throughout eternity . 
 Since meeting together to worship Jehovah will be a permanent feature of our spiritual lives in the new system of things , should we not make regular attendance at our sacred gatherings a permanent feature of our lives now ? 
 Why do we need our meetings “ all the more so as [ we ] behold the day drawing near ” ? 
 As the end draws near , we should be more determined than ever to attend our Christian gatherings for worship . 
 Out of respect for the sacred nature of our meetings , we do not allow secular work , school homework , or evening schooling to cause us to miss out on meeting regularly with our fellow believers . 
 We need the strength that comes through association . 
 Our congregation meetings provide us with the opportunity to get to know one another , to impart encouragement , and to incite one another to “ love and fine works . ” 
 We need to do this “ all the more so as [ we ] behold the day drawing near . ” 
 May we , therefore , always show proper respect for our sacred gatherings by regular attendance , appropriate dress , and fitting behavior . 
 By doing so , we show that we share Jehovah’s view of sacred things . 
 By Way of Review 
 • What shows that the gatherings of Jehovah’s people should be held sacred ? 
 • What features of our meetings prove that they are sacred gatherings ? 
 • How can children show that they respect the sacred nature of our meetings ? 
 • Why should we make regular meeting attendance a permanent feature of our lives ? 
 [ Pictures on page 28 ] 
 Meetings to worship Jehovah are sacred gatherings wherever they are held 
 [ Picture on page 31 ] 
 Our little ones attend meetings to listen and to learn 
 Keep Yourself in God’s Love ! 
 “ Beloved ones , . . . keep yourselves in God’s love , . . . with everlasting life in view . ” ​ — JUDE 20 , 21 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 How can you remain in God’s love ? 
 JEHOVAH loves the world of mankind so much that he gave his only - begotten Son in order that those exercising faith in him might have everlasting life . 
 How grand it is to experience such love ! 
 If you are a servant of Jehovah , you surely want to enjoy that love forever . 
 The disciple Jude disclosed how you can remain in God’s love . 
 “ By building up yourselves on your most holy faith , and praying with holy spirit , ” wrote Jude , “ keep yourselves in God’s love , while you are waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ with everlasting life in view . ” 
 Studying God’s Word and preaching the good news help to build you up on the “ most holy faith ” ​ — Christian teachings . 
 To remain in God’s love , you must pray “ with holy spirit , ” or under its influence . 
 In order to be blessed with everlasting life , you must also exercise faith in the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ . ​ — 1 John 4 : 10 . 
 Why are some no longer Jehovah’s Witnesses ? 
 Some who once had faith have not remained in God’s love . 
 Because they have chosen to pursue a sinful course , they are no longer Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 How can you avoid such an experience ? 
 Meditating on the following points may help you to refrain from sin and to keep yourself in God’s love . 
 Demonstrate Your Love for God 
 How important is obedience to God ? 
 Show your love for God by obeying him . 
 “ This is what the love of God means , ” wrote the apostle John , “ that we observe his commandments ; and yet his commandments are not burdensome . ” 
 A pattern of obedience to God can strengthen you to resist temptation and can make you joyful . 
 The psalmist said : “ Happy is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the wicked ones , . . . but his delight is in the law of Jehovah . ” ​ — Psalm 1 : 1 , 2 . 
 Love for Jehovah will move you to act in what way ? 
 Your love for Jehovah will move you to avoid committing a serious sin that would bring reproach upon his name . 
 “ Give me neither poverty nor riches , ” prayed Agur . 
 “ Let me devour the food prescribed for me , that I may not become satisfied and I actually deny you and say : ‘ Who is Jehovah ? ’ 
 and that I may not come to poverty and I actually steal and assail the name of my God . ” 
 Be determined not to ‘ assail the name of God ’ by bringing reproach upon him . 
 Instead , always strive to do upright things that bring him glory . ​ — Psalm 86 : 12 . 
 What could happen if you were to go headlong into sin ? 
 Pray regularly to your loving heavenly Father for help to resist temptation to engage in sin . 
 Keep following God’s counsel so that your prayers are not hindered . 
 If you were to go headlong into sin , the consequences could be tragic , for Jehovah figuratively blocks the approach of rebellious ones as with a cloud mass so that their prayers may not pass through to him . 
 So display a humble spirit , and pray that you may do nothing that would deprive you of approach to God in prayer . ​ — 2 Corinthians 13 : 7 . 
 Show Love for God’s Son 
 7 , 8 . 
 How can heeding Jesus ’ counsel help one to reject a sinful course ? 
 Display love for Jesus Christ by obeying his commandments , for this will help you to reject a sinful course . 
 “ If you observe my commandments , ” said Jesus , “ you will remain in my love , just as I have observed the commandments of the Father and remain in his love . ” 
 How can the application of Jesus ’ words assist you in remaining in God’s love ? 
 Paying attention to Jesus ’ words can help you to maintain moral integrity . 
 God’s Law to Israel stated : “ You must not commit adultery . ” 
 But Jesus revealed a principle behind that command by saying : “ Everyone that keeps on looking at a woman so as to have a passion for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart . ” 
 The apostle Peter said that some in the first - century congregation had “ eyes full of adultery ” and ‘ enticed unsteady souls . ’ 
 Unlike them , however , you can avoid sexual sins if you love and obey God and Christ and are determined to preserve your relationship with them . 
 Let Jehovah’s Spirit Lead You 
 As regards the holy spirit , what can happen if one were to persist in sin ? 
 Pray for God’s holy spirit , and allow it to lead you . 
 If you were to persist in sin , God might withdraw his spirit from you . 
 After David sinned in connection with Bath - sheba , he begged God : “ Do not throw me away from before your face ; and your holy spirit O do not take away from me . ” 
 Because of being an unrepentant sinner , King Saul did lose God’s spirit . 
 Saul sinned by offering up a burnt sacrifice and by sparing the flock , the herd , and the king of the Amalekites . 
 Jehovah thereafter withdrew his holy spirit from Saul . ​ — 1 Samuel 13 : 1 - 14 ; 15 : 1 - 35 ; 16 : 14 - 23 . 
 Why should you reject the very thought of practicing sin ? 
 Reject the very thought of practicing sin . 
 “ If we practice sin willfully after having received the accurate knowledge of the truth , ” wrote the apostle Paul , “ there is no longer any sacrifice for sins left . ” 
 How tragic it would be if you were to carry sin to that point ! 
 Display True Love for Others 
 11 , 12 . 
 In what ways will love and respect deter one from engaging in sexual misconduct ? 
 Love for fellow humans will deter you from engaging in sexual misconduct . 
 Such love will impel you to safeguard your heart so that it does not entice you to steal the affections of another person’s marriage mate . 
 Doing so could lead to the sin of adultery . 
 Be like upright Job , who did not allow himself to be attentive to any woman other than his wife . ​ — Job 31 : 1 . 
 Respect for the sanctity of marriage can help you to avoid serious sin . 
 God purposed that honorable marriage and sexual relations should be the means of propagating life . 
 Remember that the sex organs have to do with life , which is sacred . 
 Fornicators and adulterers disobey God , degrade the sexual act , lack respect for the sanctity of marriage , and sin against their own body . 
 But love of God and neighbor coupled with godly obedience will keep a person from engaging in conduct that could result in his being disfellowshipped from the Christian congregation . 
 An immoral person “ destroys valuable things ” in what way ? 
 We need to suppress sinful thoughts so that we do not cause our loved ones pain . 
 “ He that is having companionship with prostitutes destroys valuable things , ” says Proverbs 29 : 3 . 
 An unrepentant adulterer destroys his relationship with God and ruins family bonds . 
 His wife has grounds for divorce . 
 Whether the husband or the wife is the wrongdoer , a marital breakup can cause the innocent mate , the children , and others great pain . 
 Do you not agree that knowing the destructiveness of immoral conduct should move us to resist the temptation to engage in it ? 
 What lesson regarding wrongdoing can be learned from Proverbs 6 : 30 - 35 ? 
 The fact that there is no way to compensate for adultery should impel one to avoid this grossly selfish act . 
 Proverbs 6 : 30 - 35 shows that whereas people may sympathize with a thief who steals because he is hungry , they despise an adulterer because he has a bad motive . 
 He is “ bringing his own soul [ or , life ] to ruin . ” 
 Under the Mosaic Law , he would have been put to death . 
 A person who commits adultery causes others pain just to satisfy his lust , and an unrepentant adulterer does not remain in God’s love but is expelled from the clean Christian congregation . 
 Maintain a Clean Conscience 
 What is the condition of a conscience marked “ as with a branding iron ” ? 
 To remain in God’s love , we cannot allow our conscience to become insensitive to sin . 
 Obviously , we must not accept the world’s low moral standards , and we need to exercise care in such matters as our choice of associates , reading material , and entertainment . 
 Paul warned : “ In later periods of time some will fall away from the faith , paying attention to misleading inspired utterances and teachings of demons , by the hypocrisy of men who speak lies , marked in their conscience as with a branding iron . ” 
 A conscience marked “ as with a branding iron ” is like seared flesh covered with scar tissue and devoid of feeling . 
 Such a conscience would no longer warn us to stay away from apostates and from situations that could cause us to fall away from the faith . 
 Why is it so important to have a clean conscience ? 
 Our salvation depends on our having a clean conscience . 
 Through our faith in Jesus ’ shed blood , our conscience has been cleansed from dead works , “ that we may render sacred service to the living God . ” 
 If we were to sin willfully , our conscience would become defiled and we would no longer be clean people fit for God’s service . 
 But with Jehovah’s help , we can have a clean conscience . 
 Other Ways to Avoid Wrong Conduct 
 Of what benefit is it to ‘ follow Jehovah fully ’ ? 
 ‘ Follow Jehovah fully , ’ as did Caleb of ancient Israel . 
 Do what God requires of you , and never consider partaking of “ the table of demons . ” 
 Reject apostasy . 
 Partake appreciatively of the spiritual food available only at Jehovah’s table , and you will not be misled by false teachers or wicked spirit forces . 
 Focus on spiritual things , such as Bible study , meeting attendance , and the field ministry . 
 You are sure to be happy if you follow Jehovah fully and have plenty to do in the Lord’s work . ​ — 1 Corinthians 15 : 58 . 
 How will fear of Jehovah affect your conduct ? 
 Be determined to “ render God sacred service with godly fear and awe . ” 
 Reverential fear of Jehovah will motivate you to reject any wayward course . 
 It will help you to conduct yourself in harmony with Peter’s counsel to fellow anointed ones : “ If you are calling upon the Father who judges impartially according to each one’s work , conduct yourselves with fear during the time of your alien residence . ” ​ — 1 Peter 1 : 17 . 
 Why should you constantly put into practice the things you are learning from God’s Word ? 
 Constantly put into practice what you are learning from God’s Word . 
 This will help you to avoid serious sin because you will prove to be among “ those who through use have their perceptive powers trained to distinguish both right and wrong . ” 
 Instead of being careless in speech and conduct , be vigilant so that you walk as a wise person , “ buying out the opportune time ” in these wicked days . 
 “ Go on perceiving what the will of Jehovah is , ” and keep on doing it . ​ — Ephesians 5 : 15 - 17 ; 2 Peter 3 : 17 . 
 Why should we avoid covetousness ? 
 Allow no place for covetousness ​ — greedy desire for what belongs to others . 
 One of the Ten Commandments says : “ You must not desire [ “ covet , ” New International Version ] your fellowman’s house . 
 You must not desire your fellowman’s wife , nor his slave man nor his slave girl nor his bull nor his ass nor anything that belongs to your fellowman . ” 
 This law protected a person’s house , wife , servants , animals , and so forth . 
 But most important is Jesus ’ statement that covetousness defiles a man . ​ — Mark 7 : 20 - 23 . 
 21 , 22 . 
 What preventive measures might a Christian take in order to avoid sinning ? 
 Take preventive measures so that desire does not lead to sin . 
 The disciple James wrote : “ Each one is tried by being drawn out and enticed by his own desire . 
 Then the desire , when it has become fertile , gives birth to sin ; in turn , sin , when it has been accomplished , brings forth death . ” 
 For example , if a person has had a drinking problem in the past , he may decide not to have alcoholic beverages on hand in his home . 
 To avoid temptation involving a member of the opposite sex , a Christian may need to change his work location or his place of employment . ​ — Proverbs 6 : 23 - 28 . 
 Do not take even the first step toward sin . 
 Flirtation and the entertaining of immoral ideas can result in fornication or adultery . 
 Telling small lies could embolden a person to tell big ones and might lead to the sinful practice of lying . 
 Little thefts could dull an individual’s conscience to the point that he begins to steal on a larger scale . 
 Even a slight toleration of apostate thinking might start one down the road to full - fledged apostasy . ​ — Proverbs 11 : 9 ; Revelation 21 : 8 . 
 What if You Have Sinned ? 
 23 , 24 . 
 What comfort can be drawn from 2 Chronicles 6 : 29 , 30 and Proverbs 28 : 13 ? 
 All humans are imperfect . 
 But if you have sinned seriously , you can draw comfort from King Solomon’s prayer at the inauguration of Jehovah’s temple . 
 Solomon prayed to God : “ Whatever prayer , whatever request for favor there may occur on the part of any man or of all your people Israel , because they know each one his own plague and his own pain ; when he actually spreads out his palms toward this house , then may you yourself hear from the heavens , the place of your dwelling , and you must forgive and give to each one according to all his ways , because you know his heart ( for you yourself alone well know the heart of the sons of mankind ) . ” ​ — 2 Chronicles 6 : 29 , 30 . 
 Yes , God knows the heart and is forgiving . 
 Proverbs 28 : 13 says : “ He that is covering over his transgressions will not succeed , but he that is confessing and leaving them will be shown mercy . ” 
 By repentantly confessing and leaving sin , a person can receive God’s mercy . 
 Yet , if you are at a low ebb spiritually , what else can help you to remain in God’s love ? 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • How can we keep ourselves in God’s love ? 
 • How does love for God and Christ help us to reject a sinful course ? 
 • Why does real love for others deter us from engaging in sexual misconduct ? 
 • What are some ways to avoid wrong conduct ? 
 [ Picture on page 21 ] 
 Jude shows us how to keep ourselves in God’s love 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 A marital breakup can cause the innocent mate and children great pain 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 Like Caleb , are you determined to ‘ follow Jehovah fully ’ ? 
 [ Picture on page 25 ] 
 Pray regularly for help to resist temptation 
 “ The discipline of Jehovah . . . do not reject . ” ​ — PROVERBS 3 : 11 . 
 Why should we accept divine discipline ? 
 KING SOLOMON of ancient Israel gives each one of us a good reason to accept discipline from God . 
 “ The discipline of Jehovah , O my son , do not reject , ” says Solomon , “ and do not abhor his reproof , because the one whom Jehovah loves he reproves , even as a father does a son in whom he finds pleasure . ” 
 Yes , your heavenly Father disciplines you because he loves you . 
 How is “ discipline ” defined , and how may a person be disciplined ? 
 “ Discipline ” refers to chastisement , correction , instruction , and education . 
 “ No discipline seems for the present to be joyous , but grievous , ” wrote the apostle Paul , “ yet afterward to those who have been trained by it it yields peaceable fruit , namely , righteousness . ” 
 Accepting and applying divine discipline can help you to pursue a righteous course and thus bring you closer to the holy God , Jehovah . 
 Correction may come by way of fellow believers , through things learned at Christian meetings , and from your study of God’s Word and the publications of “ the faithful steward . ” 
 How thankful you can be when something needing adjustment is thus brought to your attention ! 
 But what discipline may be required if serious sin is committed ? 
 When does disfellowshipping take place ? 
 God’s servants study the Bible and Christian publications . 
 Jehovah’s standards are discussed at their meetings , assemblies , and conventions . 
 So Christians are in a position to know what Jehovah requires of them . 
 Disfellowshipping takes place only if a member of the congregation unrepentantly engages in gross sin . 
 4 , 5 . 
 What Scriptural example of disfellowshipping is presented here , and why was the congregation urged to reinstate the man ? 
 Consider a Scriptural example of disfellowshipping . 
 The congregation in Corinth tolerated “ such fornication as [ was ] not even among the nations , that a wife a certain man [ had ] of his father . ” 
 Paul urged the Corinthians to “ hand such a man over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh , in order that the spirit may be saved . ” 
 When disfellowshipped and thus handed over to Satan , the sinner was again part of the Devil’s world . 
 His expulsion removed an evil fleshly element from the congregation and preserved its godly “ spirit , ” or dominant attitude . ​ — 2 Timothy 4 : 22 ; 1 Corinthians 5 : 11 - 13 . 
 Before a very long time had passed , Paul urged the Christians in Corinth to reinstate the wrongdoer . 
 Why ? 
 It was so that they might not be “ overreached by Satan , ” said the apostle . 
 The sinner had evidently repented and cleaned up his life . 
 If the Corinthians refused to reinstate the repentant man , Satan would overreach them in that they would be as hard and unforgiving as the Devil wanted them to be . 
 Very likely , they soon did “ forgive and comfort ” the penitent man . ​ — 2 Corinthians 2 : 5 - 7 . 
 Disfellowshipping can accomplish what ? 
 What is accomplished by disfellowshipping ? 
 It keeps Jehovah’s holy name clear of reproach and protects the fine reputation of his people . 
 Removing an unrepentant wrongdoer from the congregation upholds God’s standards and preserves the congregation’s spiritual cleanness . 
 It may also bring the unrepentant one to his senses . 
 What effect did failure to confess his transgressions have on David ? 
 Most who sin seriously are truly repentant and are not disfellowshipped from the congregation . 
 Of course , genuine repentance does not necessarily come easily . 
 Consider Israel’s King David , who composed Psalm 32 . 
 That song reveals that for a time David did not confess his serious sins , likely involving Bath - sheba . 
 The result was that anguish over his sins depleted his vigor , just as summer’s dry heat saps moisture from a tree . 
 David suffered physically and mentally , but when he ‘ confessed his transgressions , Jehovah pardoned him . ’ 
 Then David sang : “ Happy is the man to whose account Jehovah does not put error . ” 
 How wonderful it was to experience God’s mercy ! 
 8 , 9 . 
 How is repentance manifested , and how important is it in connection with the reinstatement of a disfellowshipped person ? 
 Clearly , then , a sinner must be repentant if he is to receive mercy . 
 However , neither shame nor fear of exposure is repentance . 
 “ To repent ” means “ to change one’s mind ” with regard to bad conduct , because of regret . 
 A repentant person has “ a heart broken and crushed ” and wants to ‘ right the wrong ’ if possible . ​ — Psalm 51 : 17 ; 2 Corinthians 7 : 11 . 
 Repentance is a very important factor in connection with reinstatement into the Christian congregation . 
 A disfellowshipped person is not automatically accepted back into the congregation after a certain amount of time has passed . 
 Before he can be reinstated , his heart condition must undergo a great change . 
 He must come to realize the gravity of his sin and the reproach he brought upon Jehovah and the congregation . 
 The sinner must repent , pray earnestly for forgiveness , and conform to God’s righteous requirements . 
 When requesting reinstatement , he should be able to give evidence that he has repented and is producing “ works that befit repentance . ” ​ — Acts 26 : 20 . 
 10 , 11 . 
 Why should we not just try to hide sin ? 
 Some who have sinned might reason : ‘ If I tell anyone about my sin , I may have to answer embarrassing questions and may be disfellowshipped . 
 But if I keep quiet , that can be avoided and nobody in the congregation will ever know . ’ 
 Such thinking fails to take some important factors into account . 
 What are these ? 
 Jehovah is “ a God merciful and gracious , slow to anger and abundant in loving - kindness and truth , preserving loving - kindness for thousands , pardoning error and transgression and sin . ” 
 Yet , he does correct his people “ to the proper degree . ” 
 If you were to sin seriously , how could you receive God’s mercy if you tried to hide your sin ? 
 Jehovah is aware of it , and he does not merely ignore wrongdoing . ​ — Proverbs 15 : 3 ; Habakkuk 1 : 13 . 
 12 , 13 . 
 What can result from trying to hide wrongdoing ? 
 If you have committed a serious sin , confession can help you to regain a good conscience . 
 But failure to confess could result in a defiled conscience that could lead you into more sin . 
 Remember that your sin is not just against another human or the congregation . 
 It is against God . 
 The psalmist sang : “ Jehovah ​ — in the heavens is his throne . 
 His own eyes behold , his own beaming eyes examine the sons of men . 
 Jehovah himself examines the righteous one as well as the wicked one . ” ​ — Psalm 11 : 4 , 5 . 
 Jehovah will not bless anyone who hides gross sin and tries to stay in the clean Christian congregation . 
 So if you have fallen into sin and want to do what is right , do not hesitate to make an honest confession . 
 Otherwise , you will have a guilty conscience , especially when you read or hear counsel regarding such serious matters . 
 What if Jehovah were to withdraw his spirit from you , as he did in the case of King Saul ? 
 With God’s spirit removed , you could fall into even more serious sin . 
 Why should a wrongdoer follow the counsel of James 5 : 14 , 15 ? 
 So , then , what should a repentant wrongdoer do ? 
 “ Let him call the older men of the congregation to him , and let them pray over him , greasing him with oil in the name of Jehovah . 
 And the prayer of faith will make the indisposed one well , and Jehovah will raise him up . ” 
 Approaching the elders is one way for a person to “ produce fruit that befits repentance . ” 
 These faithful and warmhearted men will ‘ pray over him and grease him with oil in Jehovah’s name . ’ 
 Like soothing oil , their Bible counsel will prove to be comforting to anyone who is truly repentant . ​ — Jeremiah 8 : 22 . 
 15 , 16 . 
 How do Christian elders follow the example set by God , as recorded at Ezekiel 34 : 15 , 16 ? 
 What a loving example was set by our Shepherd , Jehovah , when he freed the Jews from Babylonian captivity in 537 B.C.E . and when he liberated spiritual Israel from “ Babylon the Great ” in 1919 C.E . ! 
 He thus fulfilled his promise : “ I myself shall feed my sheep , and I myself shall make them lie down . . . 
 The lost one I shall search for , and the dispersed one I shall bring back , and the broken one I shall bandage and the ailing one I shall strengthen . ” ​ — Ezekiel 34 : 15 , 16 . 
 Jehovah fed his figurative sheep , made them lie down in security , and searched for the lost ones . 
 Similarly , Christian shepherds see to it that God’s flock is spiritually well - fed and secure . 
 The elders search for sheep who wander away from the congregation . 
 Just as God ‘ bandaged the broken one , ’ overseers “ bandage ” sheep wounded by someone’s words or by their own actions . 
 And as God ‘ strengthened the ailing one , ’ the elders help those who have become spiritually sick , possibly because of personal wrongdoing . 
 Why should we not hesitate to seek the spiritual help of the elders ? 
 The elders gladly comply with this counsel : “ Continue showing mercy . . . , doing so with fear . ” 
 By falling into sexual immorality , some Christians have sinned seriously . 
 But if they are truly repentant , they can expect merciful , loving treatment by elders eager to help them spiritually . 
 Including himself , Paul said regarding such men : “ Not that we are the masters over your faith , but we are fellow workers for your joy . ” 
 Therefore , never hesitate to seek their spiritual assistance . 
 How do elders deal with erring fellow believers ? 
 If you have sinned seriously , why can you have confidence in the elders ? 
 Because they are primarily shepherds of God’s flock . 
 No loving shepherd beats a docile , bleating lamb for hurting itself . 
 When elders deal with erring fellow believers , therefore , it is a matter , not of crime and punishment , but of sin and spiritual restoration where possible . 
 Elders must judge with righteousness and “ treat the flock with tenderness . ” 
 Like all other Christians , elders are to ‘ exercise justice , love kindness , and be modest in walking with God . ’ 
 Such qualities are vital when making decisions involving the life and sacred service of “ the sheep of [ Jehovah’s ] pasturage . ” ​ — Psalm 100 : 3 . 
 Like ancient shepherds , Christian elders “ bandage ” God’s wounded sheep 
 With what attitude do Christian elders try to readjust someone ? 
 Christian shepherds are appointed by holy spirit and seek to be led by it . 
 If “ a man takes some false step before he is aware of it ” ​ — as though caught off guard — ​ spiritually qualified men try to “ readjust such a man in a spirit of mildness . ” 
 With mildness yet firmness for divine standards , the elders try to readjust his thinking , just as a considerate doctor sets a broken limb carefully , to avoid causing needless pain and yet care for the problem . 
 Since any extending of mercy would be based on prayer and the Scriptures , the elders ’ decision would reflect God’s view of matters . ​ — Matthew 18 : 18 . 
 When may it be necessary to announce to the congregation that a certain person has been reproved ? 
 If a sin is widely known or will undoubtedly become known , an announcement to the congregation would likely be appropriate in order to protect its reputation . 
 An announcement will also be made if the congregation needs to be informed . 
 During the time that an individual who has been judicially reproved is healing spiritually , he might be likened to a person recovering from an injury , which temporarily limits his activity . 
 For a time , very likely it would be beneficial for the repentant one to listen rather than comment at meetings . 
 The elders may arrange for someone to have a Bible study with him to strengthen him where he is weak so that he may again become “ healthy in faith . ” 
 All of this is done in love and is not intended to punish the wrongdoer . 
 How may some cases of wrongdoing be handled ? 
 Elders can provide spiritual help in various ways . 
 For instance , suppose a brother who in the past had a drinking problem drank too much once or twice when home alone . 
 Or perhaps one who long ago abandoned the use of tobacco smoked privately a time or two in a moment of weakness . 
 Although he has prayed and believes that God has forgiven him , he should seek the help of an elder so that such a sin does not become habitual . 
 An elder or two might handle the situation . 
 However , the elder ( s ) would inform the presiding overseer , as there may be other factors involved . 
 22 , 23 . 
 Why should you continue to accept divine discipline ? 
 To enjoy God’s approval , each Christian must pay attention to Jehovah’s discipline . 
 So take to heart any correction received when you study the Scriptures and Christian publications or when you hear counsel presented at meetings , assemblies , and conventions of Jehovah’s people . 
 Remain vigilant with regard to the doing of Jehovah’s will . 
 Then divine discipline will help you to maintain a spiritual bulwark ​ — a strong wall - like defense against sin . 
 Accepting divine discipline will enable you to remain in God’s love . 
 True , some have been expelled from the Christian congregation , but this need not happen to you if you “ safeguard your heart ” and ‘ walk as a wise person . ’ 
 If you are now disfellowshipped , however , why not take steps toward reinstatement ? 
 God wants all who have made a dedication to him to worship him faithfully and with “ joy of heart . ” 
 You can do so forever if you always accept Jehovah’s discipline . ​ — Psalm 100 : 2 . 
 Why are some expelled from the Christian congregation ? 
 What does true repentance involve ? 
 Why should serious sin be confessed ? 
 In what ways do Christian elders help repentant wrongdoers ? 
 Love the God Who Loves You 
 “ You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind . ” ​ — MATTHEW 22 : 37 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What may have prompted the question about the greatest commandment ? 
 THE question was evidently hotly disputed among the Pharisees of Jesus ’ day . 
 Of the more than 600 laws that made up the Mosaic Law , which was the most important ? 
 Was it a law that had to do with sacrifice ? 
 After all , sacrifices were made both to receive forgiveness of sins and to offer thanks to God . 
 Or might the supreme law be the law on circumcision ? 
 That too was important , since circumcision was a sign of the covenant that Jehovah had made with Abraham . ​ — Genesis 17 : 9 - 13 . 
 On the other hand , conservatives apparently reasoned that since every law that God gave was great ​ — even though some might have seemed to be of lesser importance — ​ it would be wrong to lift any commandment above the others . 
 The Pharisees decided to put the controversial question to Jesus . 
 Perhaps he would say something that might damage his credibility . 
 One of them approached Jesus and asked : “ Which is the greatest commandment in the Law ? ” ​ — Matthew 22 : 34 - 36 . 
 What did Jesus say was the greatest commandment ? 
 The answer Jesus gave has tremendous importance for us today . 
 In his reply , he summed up what always was and always will be the essence of true worship . 
 Quoting from Deuteronomy 6 : 5 , Jesus said : “ ‘ You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind . ’ 
 This is the greatest and first commandment . ” 
 Though the Pharisee asked for just one commandment , Jesus gave him another . 
 Quoting from Leviticus 19 : 18 , he said : “ The second , like it , is this , ‘ You must love your neighbor as yourself . ’ ” 
 Jesus then indicated that these two laws embraced the whole of pure worship . 
 Forestalling any attempt to get him to list in order of importance the other laws , he concluded : “ On these two commandments the whole Law hangs , and the Prophets . ” 
 In this article , we will consider the greatest of these two commandments . 
 Why must we love God ? 
 How do we show that we do ? 
 And how can we develop such love ? 
 It is vital to know the answers to these questions , for to please Jehovah , we must love him with all our heart , soul , and mind . 
 The Importance of Love 
 4 , 5 . ( a ) Why was the Pharisee not surprised by what Jesus said ? 
 ( b ) What is worth more to God than sacrifices and offerings ? 
 It seems that the Pharisee who questioned Jesus was neither shocked nor surprised by the answer he received . 
 He knew that love of God was an essential aspect of true worship , though many failed to display it . 
 In the synagogues , it was the custom to recite aloud the Shema , or confession of faith , and this included the passage found at Deuteronomy 6 : 4 - 9 , from which Jesus quoted . 
 According to the parallel account in Mark , the Pharisee then said to Jesus : “ Teacher , you well said in line with truth , ‘ He is One , and there is no other than He ’ ; and this loving him with one’s whole heart and with one’s whole understanding and with one’s whole strength and this loving one’s neighbor as oneself is worth far more than all the whole burnt offerings and sacrifices . ” ​ — Mark 12 : 32 , 33 . 
 Indeed , while burnt offerings and sacrifices were required by the Law , what really matters to God is the loving heart condition of his servants . 
 A sparrow offered to God in love and devotion was worth more to him than thousands of rams given with a wrong motive . 
 Recall the account of the needy widow whom Jesus observed at the temple in Jerusalem . 
 The two small coins she placed in the treasury chest could not buy even a single sparrow . 
 Yet , that contribution , given with heartfelt love for Jehovah , meant more to him than the large donations given by the wealthy out of their surplus . 
 How encouraging to know that Jehovah values most what we can all express no matter what our circumstances ​ — our love for him ! 
 What did Paul write about the importance of love ? 
 Stressing the importance of love in true worship , the apostle Paul wrote : “ If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels but do not have love , I have become a sounding piece of brass or a clashing cymbal . 
 And if I have the gift of prophesying and am acquainted with all the sacred secrets and all knowledge , and if I have all the faith so as to transplant mountains , but do not have love , I am nothing . 
 And if I give all my belongings to feed others , and if I hand over my body , that I may boast , but do not have love , I am not profited at all . ” 
 Clearly , love is essential if our worship is to be pleasing to God . 
 How , though , do we show our love for Jehovah ? 
 How We Show Our Love for Jehovah 
 7 , 8 . 
 How can we show our love for Jehovah ? 
 Many believe that love is an emotion over which we have little control ; people speak of falling in love . 
 Yet , real love is not just something we feel . 
 It is characterized and defined by action , not sentiment . 
 The Bible refers to love as “ a surpassing way ” and as something we “ pursue . ” 
 Christians are encouraged to love , not only “ in word nor with the tongue , but in deed and truth . ” ​ — 1 John 3 : 18 . 
 Love of God impels us to do what is pleasing to him and to defend and uphold his sovereignty , by both words and deeds . 
 It moves us to avoid loving the world and its ungodly ways . 
 Those who love God hate what is bad . 
 Love of God also involves love of neighbor , which we will discuss in the next article . 
 Furthermore , love of God requires our obedience . 
 The Bible says : “ This is what the love of God means , that we observe his commandments . ” ​ — 1 John 5 : 3 . 
 How did Jesus demonstrate his love for God ? 
 Jesus demonstrated perfectly what it means to love God . 
 Love moved him to leave his heavenly home and to dwell on earth as a man . 
 It impelled him to glorify his Father by the things he did and taught . 
 Love moved him to be “ obedient as far as death . ” 
 That obedience ​ — an expression of his love — ​ opened the way for faithful ones to have a righteous standing before God . 
 Paul wrote : “ Through the disobedience of the one man [ Adam ] many were constituted sinners , likewise also through the obedience of the one person [ Christ Jesus ] many will be constituted righteous . ” ​ — Romans 5 : 19 . 
 Why does love for God involve obedience ? 
 Like Jesus , we show our love by being obedient to God . 
 “ This is what love means , ” writes Jesus ’ beloved apostle John , “ that we go on walking according to his commandments . ” 
 Those who truly love Jehovah long for his guidance . 
 Recognizing that they cannot successfully direct their own steps , they trust in God’s wisdom and submit to his loving direction . 
 They are like the noble - minded ones in ancient Beroea who accepted God’s message with “ eagerness of mind , ” having a keen desire to do the will of God . 
 They carefully examined the Scriptures to understand the will of God more fully , which helped them express love in further acts of obedience . 
 What does it mean to love God with our whole heart , mind , soul , and strength ? 
 As Jesus said , love for God involves our whole heart , mind , soul , and strength . 
 Such love emanates from the heart , involving our feelings , desires , and inmost thoughts , and we fervently desire to please Jehovah . 
 We also love with our mind . 
 Our devotion is not blind ; we have come to know Jehovah ​ — his qualities , standards , and purposes . 
 We use our soul , our whole being and the life we possess , to serve and praise him . 
 And we use our strength to that end as well . 
 Why We Should Love Jehovah 
 Why does God require that we love him ? 
 One reason we should love Jehovah is that he requires us to reflect his qualities . 
 God is both the source and the supreme example of love . 
 “ God is love , ” wrote the inspired apostle John . 
 Humans were created in God’s image ; we were designed to love . 
 In fact , Jehovah’s sovereignty is based on love . 
 He wants as his subjects those who serve him because they both love and desire his righteous way of ruling . 
 Really , love is essential for the peace and harmony of all creation . 
 ( a ) Why were the Israelites told : “ Love Jehovah your God ” ? 
 ( b ) Why is it reasonable that Jehovah expects us to love him ? 
 Another reason for loving Jehovah is that we appreciate what he has done for us . 
 Recall that Jesus said to the Jews : “ You must love Jehovah your God . ” 
 They were not expected to love a divine being who was distant and unknown . 
 They were to love the Person who had revealed his love to them . 
 Jehovah was their God . 
 He was the One who brought them out of Egypt into the Promised Land , the One who protected , sustained , and cherished them , the One who disciplined them in love . 
 And today , Jehovah is our God , the one who gave his Son as a ransom that we might have everlasting life . 
 How reasonable it is that Jehovah expects us to love him in return ! 
 Our love is a responsive love ; we are asked to love the God who loves us . 
 Our love is for the One who “ first loved us . ” ​ — 1 John 4 : 19 . 
 In what way is Jehovah’s love like that of a loving parent ? 
 Jehovah’s love for mankind is like that of a loving parent for his children . 
 Though imperfect , loving parents toil for years in caring for their children , doing so at great sacrifice materially and otherwise . 
 Parents instruct , encourage , support , and discipline their children because they want them to be happy and to flourish . 
 What do parents desire in return ? 
 They want their children to love them and to take to heart what they have imparted to the children for their good . 
 Is it not reasonable that our perfect heavenly Father expects us to show loving appreciation for all that he has done for us ? 
 Cultivating Love for God 
 What is the first step in cultivating love for God ? 
 We have neither seen God nor heard his voice . 
 Yet , he invites us to enter into a loving relationship with him . 
 How can we do that ? 
 The first step toward loving anyone is to take in knowledge of that one ; it is hard to feel deep affection for someone we do not know . 
 Jehovah has provided his Word , the Bible , so that we can learn about him . 
 That is why Jehovah , through his organization , encourages us to read the Bible regularly . 
 It is the Bible that teaches us about God , his qualities , his personality , as well as his dealings with people over thousands of years . 
 As we meditate on such accounts , our appreciation and love for him will grow . ​ — Romans 15 : 4 . 
 How does reflecting on Jesus ’ ministry enhance our love for God ? 
 A primary way that we can grow in our love for Jehovah is to reflect on the life and ministry of Jesus . 
 After all , Jesus mirrored his Father so perfectly that he could say : “ He that has seen me has seen the Father also . ” 
 Are you not touched by the compassion Jesus showed in restoring life to the only son of a widow ? 
 Is it not appealing to know that he ​ — the Son of God and the greatest man who ever lived — ​ humbly washed the feet of his disciples ? 
 Does it not move you to know that though he was greater and wiser than any other man , he made himself approachable to all , including children ? 
 As we meditate appreciatively upon these things , we become like the Christians about whom Peter wrote : “ Though you never saw [ Jesus ] , you love him . ” 
 As our love for Jesus grows , so does our love for Jehovah . 
 17 , 18 . 
 Meditating on what loving provisions of Jehovah can make our love for him grow ? 
 Another way that we can grow in our love for God is to meditate on the abundant loving provisions he has made to let us enjoy life ​ — the beauty of creation , the endless variety of delicious things to eat , the warm companionship of good friends , as well as countless other delights that give us pleasure and satisfaction . 
 The more we learn about our God , the more reasons we have to appreciate his boundless goodness and generosity . 
 Think about all the things that Jehovah has done for you personally . 
 Do you not agree that he deserves your love ? 
 Among the many gifts from God is the opportunity we have to approach him in prayer at any time , knowing that the “ Hearer of prayer ” listens to us . 
 Jehovah has delegated to his beloved Son the authority both to rule and to judge . 
 However , he does not delegate to others , including his Son , the hearing of prayers . 
 He personally listens to our prayers . 
 The loving , personal concern that Jehovah thus shows draws us close to him . 
 What promises of Jehovah draw us to him ? 
 We are also drawn to Jehovah when we consider what he has in store for humankind . 
 He has promised to bring an end to sickness , sorrow , and death . 
 Once mankind is brought to perfection , no one will suffer depression , discouragement , or tragedy . 
 Hunger , poverty , and war will be no more . 
 The earth will be transformed into a paradise . 
 Jehovah will bring these blessings , not because he has to , but because he loves us . 
 What did Moses say about the benefits of loving Jehovah ? 
 There are , therefore , compelling reasons to love our God and to let that love grow . 
 Will you continue to strengthen your love for God , allowing him to direct your ways ? 
 The choice is up to you . 
 Moses recognized the benefits of cultivating and maintaining love for Jehovah . 
 To the Israelites of long ago , Moses said : “ You must choose life in order that you may keep alive , you and your offspring , by loving Jehovah your God , by listening to his voice and by sticking to him ; for he is your life and the length of your days . ” ​ — Deuteronomy 30 : 19 , 20 . 
 Do You Recall ? 
 • Why is it essential that we love Jehovah ? 
 • How can we show our love for God ? 
 • What reasons do we have for loving Jehovah ? 
 • How can we cultivate the love of God ? 
 [ Picture on page 20 ] 
 Jehovah truly values what we can all express ​ — our love for him 
 [ Pictures on page 23 ] 
 “ He that has seen me has seen the Father also . ” ​ — John 14 : 9 
 What It Means to Love Our Neighbor 
 “ You must love your neighbor as yourself . ” ​ — MATTHEW 22 : 39 . 
 How do we show that we love God ? 
 WHAT does Jehovah require of those who worship him ? 
 In a few simple and profound words , Jesus summarized the answer . 
 The greatest commandment , he said , is to love Jehovah with our whole heart , soul , mind , and strength . 
 As we have seen in the preceding article , love of God involves obeying him and keeping his commandments in response to the love he has shown us . 
 For those who love God , doing his will is not a burden ; it brings them delight . ​ — Psalm 40 : 8 ; 1 John 5 : 2 , 3 . 
 2 , 3 . 
 Why should we give attention to the commandment to love our neighbor , and what questions arise ? 
 The second greatest commandment , Jesus said , is linked to the first : “ You must love your neighbor as yourself . ” 
 It is to this commandment that we now give attention , and for good reason . 
 The times in which we live are marked by a selfish , distorted form of love . 
 In his inspired description of “ the last days , ” the apostle Paul wrote that people would love , not one another , but themselves , money , and pleasures . 
 Many would have “ no natural affection , ” or as one Bible translation puts it , they would “ lack normal affection for their families . ” 
 Jesus Christ foretold : “ Many . . . will betray one another and will hate one another . . . . 
 The love of the greater number will cool off . ” ​ — Matthew 24 : 10 , 12 . 
 Notice , however , that Jesus did not say that the love of everyone would cool off . 
 There have always been and will always be those who display the sort of love that Jehovah both requires and deserves . 
 Those who truly love Jehovah will strive to view others as he does . 
 Who , though , is our neighbor whom we must love ? 
 How should we show love toward our neighbor ? 
 The Scriptures can help us to answer these important questions . 
 Who Is My Neighbor ? 
 According to Leviticus chapter 19 , to whom were the Jews to show love ? 
 When telling the Pharisee that the second greatest commandment was to love one’s neighbor as oneself , Jesus was referring to a specific law given to Israel . 
 It is recorded at Leviticus 19 : 18 . 
 In that same chapter , the Jews were told that they should view others besides fellow Israelites as their neighbors . 
 Verse 34 states : “ The alien resident who resides as an alien with you should become to you like a native of yours ; and you must love him as yourself , for you became alien residents in the land of Egypt . ” 
 Thus , even non - Jews , especially the proselytes , were to be treated with love . 
 How did the Jews understand love of neighbor ? 
 The Jewish leaders of Jesus ’ day , however , saw the matter differently . 
 Some taught that the terms “ friend ” and “ neighbor ” applied only to Jews . 
 Non - Jews were to be hated . 
 Such teachers reasoned that the godly must despise the godless . 
 “ In such an atmosphere , ” says one reference work , “ it was impossible for hatred to starve . 
 It had plenty to feed on . ” 
 What two points did Jesus make when talking about love of neighbor ? 
 In his Sermon on the Mount , Jesus addressed this issue , shedding light on who should be treated with love . 
 He said : “ You heard that it was said , ‘ You must love your neighbor and hate your enemy . ’ 
 However , I say to you : Continue to love your enemies and to pray for those persecuting you ; that you may prove yourselves sons of your Father who is in the heavens , since he makes his sun rise upon wicked people and good and makes it rain upon righteous people and unrighteous . ” 
 Here Jesus made two points . 
 First , Jehovah is generous and kind to both the good and the bad . 
 Second , we should follow his example . 
 What lesson do we learn from the parable of the neighborly Samaritan ? 
 On another occasion , a Jew well - versed in the Law asked Jesus : “ Who really is my neighbor ? ” 
 Jesus responded by relating a parable that described a Samaritan who came across a man , a Jew , who had been assaulted by robbers and stripped of his possessions . 
 Even though Jews in general despised Samaritans , the Samaritan dressed the man’s wounds and brought him to the safety of an inn , where he could recover . 
 The lesson ? 
 Our love of neighbor should extend to people other than those of our own race , nationality , or religion . ​ — Luke 10 : 25 , 29 , 30 , 33 - 37 . 
 What It Means to Love Our Neighbor 
 What does Leviticus chapter 19 say about how love was to be shown ? 
 Love of neighbor , like love of God , is not merely a feeling ; it involves action . 
 It is helpful to consider further the context of the command recorded in Leviticus 19 that exhorts God’s people to love their neighbor as themselves . 
 There we read that the Israelites were to allow afflicted ones and alien residents to share in the harvest . 
 There was no room for stealing , deceiving , or dealing falsely . 
 In judicial matters the Israelites should show no partiality . 
 Though they were to give reproof when needed , they were specifically told : “ You must not hate your brother in your heart . ” 
 These and many other commands were summed up in the words : “ You must love your fellow as yourself . ” ​ — Leviticus 19 : 9 - 11 , 15 , 17 , 18 . 
 Why did Jehovah command the Israelites to keep separate from other nations ? 
 While the Israelites were to show love to others , they were also to keep separate from those who worshipped false gods . 
 Jehovah warned of the dangers and consequences of bad associations . 
 For example , concerning the nations that the Israelites were to dispossess , Jehovah commanded : “ You must form no marriage alliance with them . 
 Your daughter you must not give to his son , and his daughter you must not take for your son . 
 For he will turn your son from following me , and they will certainly serve other gods ; and Jehovah’s anger will indeed blaze against you . ” ​ — Deuteronomy 7 : 3 , 4 . 
 Against what do we need to be on guard ? 
 Similarly , Christians guard against forming relationships with those who might weaken their faith . 
 We are admonished : “ Do not become unevenly yoked with unbelievers , ” those who are no part of the Christian congregation . 
 Further , Christians are counseled to marry “ only in the Lord . ” 
 Yet , never should we be disdainful of those who do not share our belief in Jehovah . 
 Christ died for sinners , and many who once practiced vile things changed their ways and became reconciled to God . ​ — Romans 5 : 8 ; 1 Corinthians 6 : 9 - 11 . 
 What is the best way to show love to those who do not serve Jehovah , and why ? 
 In showing love to those who do not serve God , we can do no better than to imitate Jehovah himself . 
 Though he is no lover of wickedness , he shows loving - kindness to all by extending to them the opportunity to turn back from their bad ways and receive everlasting life . 
 Jehovah “ desires all to attain to repentance . ” 
 It is his will that “ all sorts of men should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth . ” 
 That is why Jesus commissioned his followers to preach and to teach and to “ make disciples of people of all the nations . ” 
 By our participation in this work , we show love for both God and neighbor , yes , including even our enemies ! 
 Love for Our Christian Brothers 
 What did the apostle John write about loving our brother ? 
 The apostle Paul wrote : “ Let us work what is good toward all , but especially toward those related to us in the faith . ” 
 As Christians , we have an obligation to show love for those who are related to us in the faith ​ — our spiritual brothers and sisters . 
 How important is this love ? 
 Making this powerful point , the apostle John wrote : “ Everyone who hates his brother is a manslayer . . . 
 If anyone makes the statement : ‘ I love God , ’ and yet is hating his brother , he is a liar . 
 For he who does not love his brother , whom he has seen , cannot be loving God , whom he has not seen . ” 
 These are strong words . 
 Jesus Christ applied the words “ manslayer ” and “ liar ” to Satan the Devil . 
 Never would we want those terms applied to us ! 
 In what ways can we show love for fellow believers ? 
 True Christians are “ taught by God to love one another . ” 
 We are to love “ neither in word nor with the tongue , but in deed and truth . ” 
 Our love should be “ without hypocrisy . ” 
 Love moves us to be kind , compassionate , forgiving , long - suffering and not jealous , boastful , arrogant , or selfish . 
 It impels us to “ slave for one another . ” 
 Jesus told his disciples to love one another just as he loved them . 
 A Christian should therefore be willing to give even his life in behalf of fellow believers when necessary . 
 How can we manifest love within the family ? 
 Especially should love be manifested within a Christian family and particularly between husband and wife . 
 So close is the marriage bond that Paul said : “ Husbands ought to be loving their wives as their own bodies . ” 
 He added : “ He who loves his wife loves himself . ” 
 We find Paul repeating this admonition five verses later . 
 A husband who loves his wife will not imitate the Israelites of Malachi’s day who dealt treacherously with their mates . 
 He will cherish her . 
 He will love her as Christ loved the congregation . 
 Love will likewise move a wife to respect her husband . ​ — Ephesians 5 : 25 , 29 - 33 . 
 What did observing brotherly love in action move some to say and do ? 
 Clearly , this kind of love is the identifying mark of true Christians . 
 Jesus said : “ By this all will know that you are my disciples , if you have love among yourselves . ” 
 Our love for one another draws people to the God whom we love and represent . 
 For example , from Mozambique comes this report about a Witness family . 
 “ We had never seen anything like it . 
 In the afternoon , a fierce wind began to blow , followed by heavy rain and hailstones . 
 The strong winds destroyed our reed house , and the zinc roofing sheets blew away . 
 When our brothers from neighboring congregations came and helped to rebuild our house , our astonished neighbors said : ‘ Your religion is very good . 
 We have never received help like this from our church . ’ 
 We opened the Bible and showed them John 13 : 34 , 35 . 
 Many of our neighbors are now studying the Bible . ” 
 Love for Individuals 
 What is the difference between loving a group and loving individuals ? 
 It is not difficult to love our neighbors collectively , as a group . 
 Love for individuals , however , can prove to be a different matter . 
 For example , some people’s love for neighbor goes no further than a donation to some charitable organization . 
 Indeed , it is far easier to say that we love our neighbor than it is to love a coworker who seems not to care for us , an obnoxious person who lives next door , or a friend who disappoints us . 
 17 , 18 . 
 How did Jesus show love to individuals , and with what motive did he do so ? 
 In this matter of love for individuals , we learn from Jesus , who perfectly reflected God’s qualities . 
 Though he came to earth to take away the sin of the world , he showed love for individuals ​ — a sickly woman , a leper , a child . 
 Similarly , we show love for our neighbor by the way we deal with the individuals with whom we come in contact day by day . 
 Never should we forget , however , that love of neighbor is linked to love of God . 
 Though Jesus helped the poor , healed the sick , and fed the hungry , his motive for doing all these things as well as for teaching the crowds was to help people become reconciled to Jehovah . 
 Jesus did all things for God’s glory , never forgetting that he represented and reflected the God whom he loved . 
 By imitating Jesus ’ example , we too can show genuine love of neighbor and at the same time remain no part of the world of wicked mankind . 
 How Do We Love Our Neighbor as Ourselves ? 
 19 , 20 . 
 What does it mean to love our neighbor as ourselves ? 
 Jesus said : “ You must love your neighbor as yourself . ” 
 It is normal to care about ourselves and to have a healthy measure of self - respect . 
 If that were not so , the commandment would have little meaning . 
 This proper love of self is not to be confused with the egocentric love of self mentioned by the apostle Paul at 2 Timothy 3 : 2 . 
 Rather , it is a reasonable sense of self - worth . 
 One Bible scholar described it as “ a balanced self - love that is neither a narcissistic ‘ I am divine ’ nor a masochistic ‘ I am dirt . ’ ” 
 To love others as we love ourselves means that we view others as we want to be viewed and treat others as we would like to be treated . 
 Jesus said : “ All things , therefore , that you want men to do to you , you also must likewise do to them . ” 
 Notice that Jesus did not say to mull over what others have done to us in the past and then repay in kind . 
 Instead , we are to think about how we would like to be treated and then act accordingly . 
 Notice , too , that Jesus did not restrict his words to friends and brothers . 
 He used the word “ men , ” perhaps to indicate that we should act in this way toward all people , everyone we meet . 
 By showing love to others , what do we demonstrate ? 
 Loving our neighbor will protect us from doing what is bad . 
 The apostle Paul wrote : “ The law code , ‘ You must not commit adultery , You must not murder , You must not steal , You must not covet , ’ and whatever other commandment there is , is summed up in this word , namely , ‘ You must love your neighbor as yourself . ’ 
 Love does not work evil to one’s neighbor . ” 
 Love will move us to look for ways to work what is good toward others . 
 By loving fellow humans , we demonstrate that we also love the one who created man in His image , Jehovah God . ​ — Genesis 1 : 26 . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • To whom should we show love , and why ? 
 • How can we show love to those who do not serve Jehovah ? 
 • How does the Bible describe the love we should have for our brothers ? 
 • What does it mean to love our neighbor as ourselves ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 “ Who really is my neighbor ? ” 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 Jesus ’ love extends to individuals 
 “ The Great Day of Jehovah Is Near ” 
 “ The great day of Jehovah is near . 
 It is near , and there is a hurrying of it very much . ” ​ — ZEPHANIAH 1 : 14 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) What special day do Christians await ? 
 ( b ) What questions do we need to ask , and why ? 
 A RADIANT young woman eagerly awaits the arrival of her wedding day . 
 An expectant mother lovingly looks forward to the birth of her baby . 
 An exhausted worker deeply desires the start of his long - awaited vacation . 
 What do they have in common ? 
 They all wait for a special day ​ — a day that will have an impact on their lives . 
 Their emotions run deep and yet are very different . 
 The day they await will eventually arrive , and when it does , they hope to be ready for it . 
 True Christians today likewise eagerly await the arrival of a special day . 
 It is the great “ day of Jehovah . ” 
 What is this coming “ day of Jehovah , ” and how will its arrival affect mankind ? 
 Moreover , how can we make sure that we are ready for its arrival ? 
 It is imperative that we seek the answers to these questions now because evidence indicates the truthfulness of the following words of the Bible : “ The great day of Jehovah is near . 
 It is near , and there is a hurrying of it very much . ” ​ — Zephaniah 1 : 14 . 
 “ The Great Day of Jehovah ” 
 What is “ the great day of Jehovah ” ? 
 What is “ the great day of Jehovah ” ? 
 Throughout the Scriptures , the expression “ the day of Jehovah ” refers to special times when Jehovah executed judgment on his enemies and glorified his great name . 
 The unfaithful people of Judah and Jerusalem as well as the oppressive inhabitants of Babylon and Egypt all faced ‘ days of Jehovah ’ when they experienced the execution of Jehovah’s judgments . 
 However , the greatest “ day of Jehovah ” still lies ahead . 
 It is the “ day ” when Jehovah’s judgment will be executed on those who have defamed his name . 
 It will start with the destruction of “ Babylon the Great , ” the world empire of false religion , and culminate in the annihilation of the rest of the wicked system of things at the war of Armageddon . ​ — Revelation 16 : 14 , 16 ; 17 : 5 , 15 - 17 ; 19 : 11 - 21 . 
 Why should most of mankind dread the fast - approaching day of Jehovah ? 
 Whether they realize it or not , most of mankind should dread this fast - approaching day . 
 Why ? 
 Through the prophet Zephaniah , Jehovah answers : “ That day is a day of fury , a day of distress and of anguish , a day of storm and of desolation , a day of darkness and of gloominess , a day of clouds and of thick gloom . ” 
 Fearsome indeed ! 
 Moreover , the prophet says : “ I will cause distress to mankind . . . because it is against Jehovah that they have sinned . ” ​ — Zephaniah 1 : 15 , 17 . 
 What positive viewpoint do millions have regarding Jehovah’s day , and why ? 
 Millions of others , however , eagerly anticipate the arrival of Jehovah’s day . 
 Why ? 
 They know that it is a time of salvation and deliverance for the righteous , a day in which Jehovah himself is highly exalted and his glorious name sanctified . 
 Whether that day is dreaded or eagerly anticipated depends largely on what people are doing with their lives now . 
 How do you view the approach of that day ? 
 Are you ready for it ? 
 Does the fact that Jehovah’s day is on the horizon affect your day - to - day life right now ? 
 “ There Will Come Ridiculers With Their Ridicule ” 
 How do most people view the “ day of Jehovah , ” and why are true Christians not surprised by this ? 
 Despite the urgency of the situation , most of earth’s inhabitants are not concerned about the approaching “ day of Jehovah . ” 
 They mock and ridicule those who warn them of its imminent arrival . 
 True Christians are not surprised by this . 
 They remember the warning recorded by the apostle Peter : “ You know this first , that in the last days there will come ridiculers with their ridicule , proceeding according to their own desires and saying : ‘ Where is this promised presence of his ? 
 Why , from the day our forefathers fell asleep in death , all things are continuing exactly as from creation’s beginning . ’ ” ​ — 2 Peter 3 : 3 , 4 . 
 What will help us to maintain a sense of urgency ? 
 What will help us to resist such negative thinking and thereby maintain a sense of urgency ? 
 Peter tells us : “ I am arousing your clear thinking faculties by way of a reminder , that you should remember the sayings previously spoken by the holy prophets and the commandment of the Lord and Savior through your apostles . ” 
 Our paying attention to prophetic warnings will help us to ‘ arouse our clear thinking faculties . ’ 
 Perhaps we have heard these reminders repeatedly , but it is vital that we now , more than ever , continue to pay attention to these warnings . ​ — Isaiah 34 : 1 - 4 ; Luke 21 : 34 - 36 . 
 Why do many ignore Bible reminders ? 
 Why do some ignore these reminders ? 
 Peter continues : “ According to their wish , this fact escapes their notice , that there were heavens from of old and an earth standing compactly out of water and in the midst of water by the word of God ; and by those means the world of that time suffered destruction when it was deluged with water . ” 
 Yes , there are those who do not wish for Jehovah’s day to arrive . 
 They do not want their lives to be disrupted . 
 They do not want to be held accountable to Jehovah for their selfish lifestyle ! 
 As Peter states , they live “ according to their own desires . ” 
 What attitude was displayed by people in the days of Noah and of Lot ? 
 Because of “ their wish , ” these ridiculers prefer to ignore that Jehovah has intervened in mankind’s affairs in the past . 
 Both Jesus Christ and the apostle Peter refer to two such events ​ — “ the days of Noah ” and “ the days of Lot . ” 
 Before the Flood , people took no note of the warning Noah gave . 
 Likewise , prior to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah , in the eyes of his sons - in - law , Lot “ seemed like a man who was joking . ” ​ — Genesis 19 : 14 . 
 What is Jehovah’s reaction to those who take no note ? 
 It is no different today . 
 Yet , note Jehovah’s reaction to those who take no note : “ I will give attention to the men who are congealing upon their dregs and who are saying in their heart , ‘ Jehovah will not do good , and he will not do bad . ’ 
 And their wealth must come to be for pillage and their houses for a desolate waste . 
 And they will build houses , but they will not have occupancy ; and they will plant vineyards , but they will not drink the wine of them . ” 
 People may continue to go about their “ normal ” daily activities , but they will not gain any permanent benefit from their hard work . 
 Why ? 
 Because Jehovah’s day will arrive suddenly , and any material riches they may have accumulated will not save them . ​ — Zephaniah 1 : 18 . 
 “ Keep in Expectation of It ” 
 What admonition should we keep in mind ? 
 Unlike the wicked world around us , we must keep in mind the admonition recorded by the prophet Habakkuk : “ The vision is yet for the appointed time , and it keeps panting on to the end , and it will not tell a lie . 
 Even if it should delay , keep in expectation of it ; for it will without fail come true . 
 It will not be late . ” 
 Even if that day may appear to delay from our imperfect viewpoint , we must remember that Jehovah is not slow . 
 His day will come exactly on time , at an hour that humans do not expect . ​ — Mark 13 : 33 ; 2 Peter 3 : 9 , 10 . 
 Of what did Jesus warn , and how does this contrast with the actions of Jesus ’ faithful followers ? 
 Emphasizing the importance of keeping in expectation of Jehovah’s day , Jesus warned that even some of his followers would lose their sense of urgency . 
 He foretold about them : “ If ever that evil slave should say in his heart , ‘ My master is delaying , ’ and should start to beat his fellow slaves and should eat and drink with the confirmed drunkards , the master of that slave will come on a day that he does not expect and in an hour that he does not know , and will punish him with the greatest severity . ” 
 In contrast , the faithful and discreet slave class loyally keeps its sense of urgency . 
 The slave class has kept on the watch and proved itself ready . 
 Jesus has appointed it “ over all his belongings ” here on the earth . ​ — Matthew 24 : 42 - 47 . 
 The Need for Urgency 
 How did Jesus highlight the need for a sense of urgency ? 
 It was imperative that first - century Christians keep their sense of urgency . 
 They needed to take immediate action to flee Jerusalem when they saw that city “ surrounded by encamped armies . ” 
 That happened in the year 66 C.E . 
 Notice how Jesus highlighted the need for urgency on the part of Christians back then : “ Let the man on the housetop not come down to take the goods out of his house ; and let the man in the field not return to the house to pick up his outer garment . ” 
 In view of the fact that history shows that Jerusalem survived for four more years , why did Christians need to heed Jesus ’ words so urgently in 66 C.E . ? 
 14 , 15 . 
 Why was it imperative for first - century Christians to act without delay on seeing Jerusalem surrounded by encamped armies ? 
 While it is true that the Roman army did not destroy Jerusalem until 70 C.E . , the intervening years were not trouble free . 
 Far from it ! 
 Those years were filled with violence and bloodshed . 
 One historian describes the situation in Jerusalem during that time as “ a fearfully bloody civil war , accompanied by acts of horrid cruelty . ” 
 Young men were recruited to strengthen the fortifications , to take up weapons , and to serve in the military . 
 They underwent daily military exercises . 
 Those who were not in favor of extreme measures were viewed as traitors . 
 If Christians had lingered in the city , they would have found themselves in an extremely dangerous position . ​ — Matthew 26 : 52 ; Mark 12 : 17 . 
 It should be noted that Jesus said that “ those in Judea , ” not just Jerusalem , were to start fleeing . 
 This was important because within a few months of their withdrawal from Jerusalem , the Roman troops once again renewed their war operations . 
 First , Galilee was subdued in 67 C.E . , and then Judaea was systematically conquered the following year . 
 This resulted in great misery throughout the countryside . 
 It also became increasingly difficult for any Jew to escape from Jerusalem itself . 
 The city gates were guarded , and any trying to escape were assumed to be deserting to the Romans . 
 What attitude did first - century Christians need to have in order to survive that time of distress ? 
 With all these factors in mind , we can understand why Jesus emphasized the urgency of the situation . 
 Christians had to be willing to make sacrifices , not allowing themselves to become sidetracked by material possessions . 
 They had to be willing to “ say good - bye to all [ their ] belongings ” in order to obey Jesus ’ warning . 
 Those who promptly obeyed and fled to the other side of the Jordan were saved . 
 Maintaining Our Sense of Urgency 
 Why should we strengthen our sense of urgency ? 
 Bible prophecies clearly reveal that we are living deep in the time of the end . 
 As never before , we need to strengthen our sense of urgency . 
 A soldier in peacetime does not feel the tension and danger of battle . 
 Still , if as a result , he feels no urgency to stay alert and is suddenly called into action , he may well be unprepared , with fatal consequences . 
 The same is true spiritually . 
 If we allow our sense of urgency to fade , we may be unprepared to fend off attacks that come our way and may be caught unawares when Jehovah’s day finally arrives . 
 If any have ‘ drawn back from following Jehovah , ’ now is the time for them to seek him again . ​ — Zephaniah 1 : 3 - 6 ; 2 Thessalonians 1 : 8 , 9 . 
 18 , 19 . 
 What will help us to keep close in mind “ the presence of the day of Jehovah ” ? 
 No wonder the apostle Peter admonishes us to keep close in mind “ the presence of the day of Jehovah ” ! 
 How can we do this ? 
 One way is by being involved “ in holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion . ” 
 Keeping busy in such activities will help us to anticipate eagerly the arrival of “ the day of Jehovah . ” 
 The Greek word translated “ keeping close in mind ” literally means “ speeding up . ” 
 We cannot actually speed up the time that remains until the arrival of Jehovah’s day . 
 Yet , as we wait for that day , the time will seem to pass much more quickly if we are busy in God’s service . ​ — 1 Corinthians 15 : 58 . 
 Meditating on God’s Word and contemplating the reminders found therein will likewise enable us to do this ​ — “ earnestly long for ( expect and hasten ) the coming ” of that day , yes , to be in “ constant expectation ” of it . 
 Included in these reminders are the numerous prophecies that foretell not only the arrival of Jehovah’s day but also the bounteous blessings that will be bestowed upon those who ‘ keep in expectation of Jehovah . ’ ​ — Zephaniah 3 : 8 . 
 What exhortation should we take to heart ? 
 Now is truly the time for all of us to take to heart the exhortation given through the prophet Zephaniah : “ Before there comes upon you people the burning anger of Jehovah , before there comes upon you the day of Jehovah’s anger , seek Jehovah , all you meek ones of the earth , who have practiced His own judicial decision . 
 Seek righteousness , seek meekness . 
 Probably you may be concealed in the day of Jehovah’s anger . ” ​ — Zephaniah 2 : 2 , 3 . 
 What will be the determination of God’s people during 2007 ? 
 How appropriate , then , is the yeartext that has been selected for the 2007 calendar year : “ The great day of Jehovah is near . ” 
 God’s people are convinced that “ it is near , and there is a hurrying of it very much . ” 
 “ It will not be late . ” 
 So as we await that day , may we be ever alert to the times in which we live , realizing that the final fulfillment of these prophecies is near at hand ! 
 Can You Answer ? 
 • What is “ the great day of Jehovah ” ? 
 • Why do many ignore the urgency of the times ? 
 • Why did Christians in the first century need to act with a sense of urgency ? 
 • How can we heighten our sense of urgency ? 
 [ Blurb on page 19 ] 
 The yeartext for 2007 will be : “ The great day of Jehovah is near . ” ​ — Zephaniah 1 : 14 . 
 [ Pictures on page 16 , 17 ] 
 As in Noah’s day , ridiculers will be taken by surprise when Jehovah acts 
 [ Picture on page 18 ] 
 Christians had to act without delay when they saw Jerusalem “ surrounded by encamped armies ” 
 Jehovah Gives “ Holy Spirit to Those Asking Him ” 
 “ If you , although being wicked , know how to give good gifts to your children , how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him ! ” ​ — LUKE 11 : 13 . 
 When do we especially need the help of the holy spirit ? 
 ‘ I CANNOT face this on my own . 
 Only with the help of the holy spirit will I be able to endure this trial ! ’ 
 Have you ever expressed such heartfelt sentiments ? 
 Most Christians have . 
 Perhaps you did so after you learned that you had contracted a serious illness . 
 Or perhaps it was at the time when your lifelong marriage mate fell asleep in death . 
 Or it may have been when your once - sunny disposition was overshadowed by the dark clouds of depression . 
 At painful times in life , you may have felt that you were surviving only because Jehovah’s holy spirit provided you with “ power beyond what is normal . ” ​ — 2 Corinthians 4 : 7 - 9 ; Psalm 40 : 1 , 2 . 
 ( a ) What challenges do true Christians face ? 
 ( b ) What questions will we consider in this article ? 
 True Christians have to deal with increasing pressure and opposition from today’s ungodly world . 
 In addition , followers of Christ are attacked by Satan the Devil himself , who is waging a vicious war against those who “ observe the commandments of God and have the work of bearing witness to Jesus . ” 
 It is no wonder , therefore , that we need the support of God’s spirit now more than ever . 
 What can we do to make sure that we continue to receive God’s holy spirit in abundance ? 
 And why can we be certain that Jehovah is more than willing to give us the strength needed in times of trial ? 
 We find the answers to these questions in two of Jesus ’ illustrations . 
 Pray Persistently 
 3 , 4 . 
 What illustration did Jesus relate , and how did he apply it to prayer ? 
 One of Jesus ’ disciples once requested : “ Lord , teach us how to pray . ” 
 In answer , Jesus gave his disciples two related illustrations . 
 The first is about a man who is hosting a guest , and the second is about a father who listens to his son . 
 Let us consider each of these two illustrations . 
 Jesus said : “ Who of you will have a friend and will go to him at midnight and say to him , ‘ Friend , loan me three loaves , because a friend of mine has just come to me on a journey and I have nothing to set before him ’ ? 
 And that one from inside says in reply , ‘ Quit making me trouble . 
 The door is already locked , and my young children are with me in bed ; I cannot rise up and give you anything . ’ 
 I tell you , Although he will not rise up and give him anything because of being his friend , certainly because of his bold persistence he will get up and give him what things he needs . ” 
 Jesus then explained how this illustration applies to the practice of prayer , saying : “ Accordingly I say to you , Keep on asking , and it will be given you ; keep on seeking , and you will find ; keep on knocking , and it will be opened to you . 
 For everyone asking receives , and everyone seeking finds , and to everyone knocking it will be opened . ” ​ — Luke 11 : 5 - 10 . 
 What does the illustration about the persistent man teach us about our disposition when praying ? 
 This vivid illustration of a persistent man shows what our disposition should be when we pray . 
 Note that Jesus says that the man succeeds in obtaining what he needs “ because of his bold persistence . ” 
 The expression “ bold persistence ” occurs only once in the Bible . 
 It is translated from a Greek word that literally means “ shamelessness . ” 
 Often shamelessness indicates a bad trait . 
 However , when shamelessness or persistence is shown for a good cause , it can be a commendable quality . 
 That is the case with the host in the illustration . 
 He does not feel any shame in asking persistently for what he needs . 
 Since Jesus presents this host as an example for us , our prayers should likewise be persistent . 
 Jehovah wants us to ‘ keep on asking , keep on seeking , keep on knocking . ’ 
 In response , he will “ give holy spirit to those asking him . ” 
 In Jesus ’ day , how was the custom of showing hospitality viewed ? 
 Jesus shows us not only how we should pray ​ — with bold persistence — ​ but also why we should do so . 
 To discern that lesson clearly , we should consider how those who listened to Jesus ’ illustration about the persistent host viewed the custom of extending hospitality . 
 Numerous passages in the Scriptures show that in Bible times , caring for visitors was a custom that was taken seriously , especially by God’s servants . 
 Failing to show hospitality was a disgrace . 
 With that in mind , let us look again at Jesus ’ story . 
 Why is the host in Jesus ’ illustration not ashamed to wake up his friend ? 
 The host in the illustration receives a visitor in the middle of the night . 
 The host feels compelled to serve food for his guest but has “ nothing to set before him . ” 
 This , in his view , is an emergency ! 
 He has to get some bread , no matter what it takes . 
 So he goes to a friend of his and shamelessly wakes him up . 
 “ Friend , loan me three loaves , ” the host calls out . 
 He persists with his request until he gets what he needs . 
 Only then , with the loaves in his possession , can he be a proper host . 
 The More Needed ​ — The More Asked For 
 What will move us to pray persistently for holy spirit ? 
 What does this illustration show about the reason why we pray persistently ? 
 The man kept asking for bread because he felt that having those loaves in his possession was absolutely necessary to carry out his duty as a host . 
 Without bread , he would fall short . 
 Comparably , because we realize that having God’s spirit is absolutely necessary to carry out our ministry as true Christians , we keep praying to God , asking for that spirit . 
 Without it , we will fail . 
 Do you see the important conclusion that we can draw from this illustration ? 
 If we view God’s spirit as something we urgently need , we are more likely to persist in asking for it . 
 9 , 10 . ( a ) Illustrate why we need to be persistent in asking God for his spirit . ( b ) What question should we ask ourselves , and why ? 
 To put this lesson in a present - day setting , imagine that one of your family members becomes sick in the middle of the night . 
 Would you awaken a doctor to ask him for help ? 
 Not if the patient has a minor complaint . 
 However , if he is having a heart attack , you would not be ashamed to call a doctor . 
 Why ? 
 Because you face an emergency . 
 You realize that skilled help is absolutely necessary . 
 Not asking for help could prove fatal . 
 Similarly , true Christians face an ongoing emergency , so to speak . 
 After all , Satan goes about like “ a roaring lion , ” trying to devour us . 
 For us to stay alive spiritually , the help of God’s spirit is absolutely necessary . 
 Not asking for God’s help could be fatal . 
 Hence , with bold persistence we ask God for his holy spirit . 
 Only by doing so will we maintain the strength needed to ‘ endure to the end . ’ ​ — Matthew 10 : 22 ; 24 : 13 . 
 It is therefore crucial for us to pause at times and ask ourselves , ‘ Really , how persistent are my prayers ? ’ 
 Remember , when we fully realize that we need God’s help , our prayers for holy spirit will be more persistent . 
 What Moves Us to Pray With Confidence ? 
 How did Jesus apply the illustration of a father and his son to prayer ? 
 Jesus ’ illustration of the persistent host highlights the disposition of the one who prays ​ — the believer . 
 The next illustration highlights the disposition of the one who hears prayers ​ — Jehovah God . 
 Jesus asked : “ Indeed , which father is there among you who , if his son asks for a fish , will perhaps hand him a serpent instead of a fish ? 
 Or if he also asks for an egg , will hand him a scorpion ? ” 
 Jesus went on to make the application , saying : “ Therefore , if you , although being wicked , know how to give good gifts to your children , how much more so will the Father in heaven give holy spirit to those asking him ! ” ​ — Luke 11 : 11 - 13 . 
 How does the illustration of the father hearing his son’s request highlight Jehovah’s willingness to respond to our prayers ? 
 With this example of a father responding to his son , Jesus reveals how Jehovah feels about those who turn to him in prayer . 
 First , note the contrast . 
 Unlike the man in the first illustration who was reluctant to respond to a call for help , Jehovah is like a caring human parent , who is eager to respond to a request from his child . 
 Jesus further reveals Jehovah’s willing disposition toward us by reasoning from the lesser to the greater . 
 He says that if a human father , though “ being wicked ” because of inherited sinfulness , gives a good gift to his son , how much more so can we expect that our heavenly Father , being benevolent , will give holy spirit to his family of worshippers ! ​ — James 1 : 17 . 
 Of what can we be sure when we pray to Jehovah ? 
 What is the lesson for us ? 
 We can be confident that when we ask our heavenly Father for holy spirit , he is more than willing to grant our request . 
 When we turn to him in prayer again and again , Jehovah will never say , as it were : “ Quit making me trouble . 
 The door is already locked . ” 
 On the contrary , Jesus stated : “ Keep on asking , and it will be given you ; keep on seeking , and you will find ; keep on knocking , and it will be opened to you . ” 
 Yes , Jehovah “ will answer us in the day that we call . ” ​ — Psalm 20 : 9 ; 145 : 18 . 
 ( a ) What erroneous idea troubles some who face trials ? 
 ( b ) When facing trials , why may we pray to Jehovah with confidence ? 
 Jesus ’ illustration of the caring father also emphasizes that Jehovah’s goodness is far greater than the goodness shown by any human parent . 
 Hence , none of us should ever feel that the trials we may be facing must be an expression of God’s displeasure with us . 
 It is our archenemy , Satan , who wants us to think that way . 
 There is no Scriptural basis for such self - condemnatory thoughts . 
 Jehovah does not try us “ with evil things . ” 
 He does not hand us a serpentlike trial or a scorpionlike test . 
 Our heavenly Father gives “ good things to those asking him . ” 
 Indeed , the more we appreciate Jehovah’s goodness and his willingness to help us , the more we will be moved to pray with confidence . 
 As we do , we too will be able to express sentiments like those of the psalmist who wrote : “ Truly God has heard ; he has paid attention to the voice of my prayer . ” ​ — Psalm 10 : 17 ; 66 : 19 . 
 How the Holy Spirit Is Our Helper 
 ( a ) What promise did Jesus make regarding the holy spirit ? 
 ( b ) What is one way that the holy spirit helps us ? 
 Shortly before his death , Jesus repeated the assurance he had given in his illustrations . 
 Speaking about the holy spirit , he told his apostles : “ I will request the Father and he will give you another helper to be with you forever . ” 
 Thus Jesus promised that the helper , or holy spirit , would be with his followers in times to come , including in our day . 
 What is one significant way that we today experience such support ? 
 The holy spirit helps us to endure various trials . 
 How so ? 
 The apostle Paul , who faced tests himself , described in a letter to the Christians in Corinth how God’s spirit came to his aid . 
 Let us briefly consider what he wrote . 
 How may our situation be similar to that of Paul ? 
 First , Paul openly told his fellow believers that he was dealing with “ a thorn in the flesh , ” a trial of some sort . 
 Then , he said : “ I three times entreated the Lord [ Jehovah ] that it might depart from me . ” 
 Even though Paul begged God to remove his affliction , it remained . 
 Perhaps you face a similar situation today . 
 Like Paul , you may have prayed with persistence and with confidence , asking Jehovah to remove a trial . 
 Despite your repeated petitions , however , the problem still confronts you . 
 Does that mean that Jehovah did not respond to your prayers and that his spirit is not helping you ? 
 Not at all ! 
 Note what the apostle Paul said next . 
 How did Jehovah answer Paul’s prayers ? 
 In response to Paul’s prayers , God told him : “ My undeserved kindness is sufficient for you ; for my power is being made perfect in weakness . ” 
 Paul said : “ Most gladly , therefore , will I rather boast as respects my weaknesses , that the power of the Christ may like a tent remain over me . ” 
 Hence , Paul experienced that through Christ , God’s powerful protection was spread over him like a tent . 
 Today , Jehovah answers our prayers in a similar manner . 
 He spreads his protection like a shelter over his servants . 
 Why are we able to endure trials ? 
 Of course , a tent does not stop the rains from falling or the winds from blowing , but it does provide some protection from those elements . 
 Likewise , the shelter provided by “ the power of the Christ ” does not stop trials from befalling us or hardships from being brought against us . 
 Yet , it does give spiritual protection against the harmful elements of this world and the attacks of its ruler , Satan . 
 Therefore , even if you are dealing with a trial that does not ‘ depart from you , ’ you can be certain that Jehovah is aware of your struggle and that he has responded to “ the sound of your outcry . ” 
 Paul wrote : “ God is faithful , and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear , but along with the temptation he will also make the way out in order for you to be able to endure it . ” ​ — 1 Corinthians 10 : 13 ; Philippians 4 : 6 , 7 . 
 What are you determined to do , and why ? 
 Granted , the present “ last days ” of this ungodly world are characterized by “ critical times hard to deal with . ” 
 Even so , for servants of God , these times are not impossible to deal with . 
 Why not ? 
 Because of the support and protection of God’s holy spirit , which Jehovah gives willingly and abundantly to all those who ask him for it with persistence and confidence . 
 May we , therefore , be resolved to keep on praying for holy spirit every day . ​ — Psalm 34 : 6 ; 1 John 5 : 14 , 15 . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • What do we need to do to receive God’s holy spirit ? 
 • Why can we be confident that Jehovah will respond to our prayers for holy spirit ? 
 • How does the holy spirit help us to endure trials ? 
 [ Picture on page 21 ] 
 What can we learn from Jesus ’ illustration about the persistent host ? 
 [ Picture on page 22 ] 
 Do you pray persistently for God’s holy spirit ? 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 What do we learn about Jehovah from the illustration of a caring father ? 
 Jehovah Will “ Cause Justice to Be Done ” 
 “ Shall not God cause justice to be done for his chosen ones who cry out to him day and night ? ” ​ — LUKE 18 : 7 . 
 Who are a source of encouragement to you , and why ? 
 AROUND the world , Jehovah’s Witnesses enjoy the company of Christian brothers and sisters who have served Jehovah faithfully for years . 
 Do you know some of these dear ones personally ? 
 Perhaps an elderly sister comes to mind , one who was baptized many years ago and rarely misses a meeting at the Kingdom Hall . 
 Or you may think of an aged brother who loyally supports the congregation’s field ministry activities week after week and has done so for decades . 
 Granted , many of these faithful ones thought that by now Armageddon would have come and gone . 
 Yet , the fact that this unjust world still exists has neither undermined their confidence in Jehovah’s promises nor weakened their determination to ‘ endure to the end . ’ 
 The depth of faith shown by such loyal servants of Jehovah is truly a source of encouragement for the entire congregation . ​ — Psalm 147 : 11 . 
 What situation saddens us ? 
 At times , though , we may observe the opposite . 
 Some Witnesses shared in the ministry for years , but over time their faith in Jehovah weakened , and they stopped associating with the Christian congregation . 
 It saddens us that former companions have left Jehovah , and it is our heartfelt desire to keep on helping each “ lost sheep ” to return to the flock . 
 Even so , these opposite outcomes ​ — some staying faithful while others lose faith — ​ raise questions . 
 What enables numerous Witnesses to keep their faith in Jehovah’s promises while others lose it ? 
 What can we personally do to ensure that our conviction that “ the great day of Jehovah ” is approaching remains firm ? 
 Let us consider an illustration found in the Gospel of Luke . 
 A Warning for Those Living “ When the Son of Man Arrives ” 
 Who can especially benefit from the illustration of the widow and the judge , and why ? 
 In Luke chapter 18 , we find Jesus ’ illustration regarding a widow and a judge . 
 It is similar to the illustration about the persistent host , which we discussed in the preceding article . 
 However , the context of the Bible passage containing the illustration of the widow and the judge shows that this especially applies to those living “ when the Son of man arrives ” in Kingdom power , which time period began in 1914 . ​ — Luke 18 : 8 . 
 * 
 What did Jesus discuss before he related the illustration found in Luke chapter 18 ? 
 Leading up to the illustration , Jesus stated that the evidence of his presence in Kingdom power would be as widely discernible “ as the lightning ” that “ shines from one part under heaven to another part under heaven . ” 
 Nonetheless , most people living in “ the time of the end ” would not pay attention to that clear evidence . 
 Why not ? 
 For the same reason that people in the time of Noah and that of Lot ignored Jehovah’s warnings . 
 Back in those times , people ‘ were eating , drinking , buying , selling , planting , and building until the day that they were destroyed . ’ 
 They lost their lives because they were so absorbed in those common activities that they did not pay attention to God’s will . 
 Today , people in general are likewise so caught up in daily affairs that they fail to see the evidence that the end of this ungodly world is near . ​ — Luke 17 : 30 . 
 ( a ) To whom did Jesus direct a warning , and why ? 
 ( b ) What has caused some to lose their faith ? 
 Clearly , Jesus was concerned that his followers too could become distracted by Satan’s world , even to the point that they might “ return to the things behind . ” 
 And , indeed , this has happened to some Christians . 
 For years such ones longed for the day when Jehovah will put an end to this wicked world . 
 However , when Armageddon did not occur by the time they expected , they became disheartened . 
 Their confidence in the nearness of Jehovah’s day of judgment faded . 
 They slowed down in the ministry and gradually became so involved in the mundane matters of life that little time was left for spiritual matters . 
 In time , they ‘ returned to the things behind ’ ​ — how sad ! 
 The Need “ Always to Pray ” 
 6 - 8 . ( a ) Relate the illustration of the widow and the judge . ( b ) How did Jesus apply this illustration ? 
 What can we do to make sure that our firm confidence in the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promises does not weaken ? 
 Jesus addressed that question right after he warned the disciples not to turn back to Satan’s wicked world . 
 Luke reports that Jesus “ went on to tell them an illustration with regard to the need for them always to pray and not to give up . ” 
 Jesus said : “ In a certain city there was a certain judge that had no fear of God and had no respect for man . 
 But there was a widow in that city and she kept going to him , saying , ‘ See that I get justice from my adversary at law . ’ 
 Well , for a while he was unwilling , but afterward he said to himself , ‘ Although I do not fear God or respect a man , at any rate , because of this widow’s continually making me trouble , I will see that she gets justice , so that she will not keep coming and pummeling me to a finish . ’ ” 
 After giving this narration , Jesus made the application : “ Hear what the judge , although unrighteous , said ! 
 Certainly , then , shall not God cause justice to be done for his chosen ones who cry out to him day and night , even though he is long - suffering toward them ? 
 I tell you , He will cause justice to be done to them speedily . 
 Nevertheless , when the Son of man arrives , will he really find the faith on the earth ? ” ​ — Luke 18 : 1 - 8 . 
 “ See That I Get Justice ” 
 What theme stands out in the illustration of the widow and the judge ? 
 The central theme of this vivid illustration stands out clearly . 
 It is mentioned by both characters in the illustration as well as by Jesus . 
 The widow pleaded : “ See that I get justice . ” 
 The judge said : “ I will see that she gets justice . ” 
 Jesus asked : “ Shall not God cause justice to be done ? ” 
 And of Jehovah , Jesus stated : “ He will cause justice to be done to them speedily . ” 
 When in particular will God “ cause justice to be done ” ? 
 ( a ) When was justice meted out in the first century ? 
 ( b ) When and how will justice be done for God’s servants today ? 
 In the first century , the “ days for meting out justice ” ( or , “ days of vengeance , ” Kingdom Interlinear ) arrived in 70 C.E . when Jerusalem and its temple were destroyed . 
 For God’s people today , justice will be done on “ the great day of Jehovah . ” 
 At that time , Jehovah will “ repay tribulation to those who make tribulation ” for his people “ as [ Jesus Christ ] brings vengeance upon those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus . ” ​ — 2 Thessalonians 1 : 6 - 8 ; Romans 12 : 19 . 
 In what way will justice come “ speedily ” ? 
 How , though , should we understand Jesus ’ assurance that Jehovah will cause justice to be done “ speedily ” ? 
 God’s Word shows that “ even though [ Jehovah ] is long - suffering , ” he will quickly execute justice when the time is ripe . 
 In Noah’s time , when the Flood arrived , the wicked were destroyed without delay . 
 Likewise , in Lot’s day , when fire rained from heaven , the wicked perished . 
 Jesus said : “ The same way it will be on that day when the Son of man is to be revealed . ” 
 Again , the wicked will experience “ sudden destruction . ” 
 Indeed , we can be fully confident that Jehovah will not allow Satan’s world to exist for one day longer than justice requires . 
 “ He Will Cause Justice to Be Done ” 
 12 , 13 . ( a ) How does Jesus ’ illustration of the widow and the judge teach a lesson ? 
 ( b ) Why can we be certain that Jehovah will hear our prayers and cause justice to be done ? 
 Jesus ’ illustration of the widow and the judge highlights still other important truths . 
 In applying the illustration , Jesus said : “ Hear what the judge , although unrighteous , said ! 
 Certainly , then , shall not God cause justice to be done for his chosen ones ? ” 
 Of course , Jesus was not comparing Jehovah with the judge as if to say that God would treat believers in the same way . 
 Instead , Jesus taught his followers a lesson about Jehovah by highlighting a contrast between that judge and God . 
 What are some of the ways in which they can be contrasted ? 
 The judge in Jesus ’ illustration was “ unrighteous , ” whereas “ God is a righteous Judge . ” 
 The judge had no interest whatsoever in the widow as a person , but Jehovah is interested in each individual . 
 The judge was unwilling to help the widow , but Jehovah is willing ​ — yes , eager — ​ to come to the aid of those serving Him . 
 What is the lesson ? 
 If the unrighteous judge listened to the requests of the widow and granted her justice , how much more so will Jehovah hear the prayers of his people and certainly cause justice to be done for them ! ​ — Proverbs 15 : 29 . 
 Why should we not lose faith in the coming of God’s day of judgment ? 
 Therefore , those who lose faith in the coming of God’s day of judgment commit a grave error . 
 Why ? 
 By giving up their firm belief that “ the great day of Jehovah ” is near , they question , in effect , whether Jehovah can be trusted to keep his promises faithfully . 
 But no one can rightfully question God’s faithfulness . 
 A valid question is , Will we personally remain faithful ? 
 And that is exactly the subject that Jesus raised at the end of the illustration about the widow and the judge . 
 “ Will He Really Find This Faith on the Earth ? ” 
 ( a ) What question did Jesus pose , and why ? 
 ( b ) What should we ask ourselves ? 
 Jesus posed the intriguing question : “ When the Son of man arrives , will he really find this faith on the earth ? ” 
 The expression “ this faith ” indicates that Jesus referred , not to faith in a general sense , but to faith of a particular kind ​ — faith like that possessed by the widow . 
 Jesus did not answer his question . 
 He raised it so that his disciples would think about the quality of their own faith . 
 Was it gradually weakening , so that they were in danger of returning to the things they had left behind ? 
 Or did they have the sort of faith exemplified by the widow ? 
 Today , we should likewise ask ourselves , ‘ What kind of faith does “ the Son of man ” find in my heart ? ’ 
 What sort of faith did the widow have ? 
 For us to be among those who will receive the justice of Jehovah , we need to follow the course of that widow . 
 What sort of faith did she have ? 
 She showed her faith by persistently “ going to [ the judge ] , saying , ‘ See that I get justice . ’ ” 
 That widow persisted in order to receive justice from an unrighteous man . 
 Similarly , God’s servants today can be confident that they will receive the justice of Jehovah ​ — even if it takes more time than they had expected . 
 Further , they show their confidence in God’s promises by persistent prayers ​ — yes , by ‘ crying out to Jehovah day and night . ’ 
 Indeed , if a Christian were to stop praying for justice to be done , he would show that he had lost confidence that Jehovah is going to act in behalf of his servants . 
 What reasons do we have to persevere in prayer and keep our faith in the certain coming of Jehovah’s day of judgment ? 
 The particular circumstances of that widow show us that we have additional reasons for persevering in prayer . 
 Consider some of the differences between her situation and ours . 
 The widow kept approaching the judge even though no one gave her any encouragement to do so , but God’s Word gives us much encouragement to “ persevere in prayer . ” 
 The widow had no assurance that her requests would be granted , but Jehovah has assured us that justice will be done . 
 By means of his prophet , Jehovah stated : “ Even if it should delay , keep in expectation of it ; for it will without fail come true . 
 It will not be late . ” 
 The widow had no helper to plead for her in order to add force to her petition . 
 But we have a powerful helper , Jesus , “ who is on the right hand of God , who also pleads for us . ” 
 Hence , if the widow , despite her challenging situation , kept pleading with the judge in hopes that justice would be done , how much more so should we keep our faith in the certain coming of Jehovah’s day of judgment ! 
 How will prayer strengthen our faith and help us to receive justice ? 
 The illustration of the widow teaches us that there is a close link between prayer and faith and that our persistent prayers can counteract influences that could weaken our faith . 
 Of course , this does not mean that a mere outward show of offering prayers is a remedy against loss of faith . 
 When we are moved to pray because we realize that we are fully dependent upon God , then prayer draws us close to God and strengthens our faith . 
 And since faith is required for salvation , no wonder Jesus found it necessary to encourage his disciples “ always to pray and not to give up ” ! 
 Granted , the coming of “ the great day of Jehovah ” does not depend on our prayers ​ — it will come whether we pray for it or not . 
 But whether we will personally receive justice and survive God’s war or not definitely does depend on the faith we have and the prayerful course we pursue . 
 How do we prove that we firmly believe that God will “ cause justice to be done ” ? 
 As we recall , Jesus asked : “ When the Son of man arrives , will he really find this faith on the earth ? ” 
 What is the answer to his intriguing question ? 
 How happy we are that millions of faithful servants of Jehovah around the earth today prove by their prayers , patience , and perseverance that they do have this faith ! 
 Thus , Jesus ’ question can be answered in the affirmative . 
 Yes , despite the injustices that Satan’s world presently inflicts upon us , we firmly believe that God shall “ cause justice to be done for his chosen ones . ” 
 [ Footnote ] 
 To appreciate fully the import of this illustration , read Luke 17 : 22 - 33 . 
 Note how the references to “ the Son of man ” at Luke 17 : 22 , 24 , 30 bear on the question raised at Luke 18 : 8 . 
 Do You Recall ? 
 • What has caused some Christians to lose faith ? 
 • Why can we have firm faith in the coming of Jehovah’s day of judgment ? 
 • What reasons do we have to persevere in prayer ? 
 • How will persistent prayer help to prevent us from losing our faith ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 What is highlighted by the illustration of the widow and the judge ? 
 [ Pictures on page 29 ] 
 Millions today firmly believe that God shall “ cause justice to be done ” 
 “ You Must Become Nothing but Joyful ” 
 “ You will celebrate the festival to Jehovah . . . , and you must become nothing but joyful . ” ​ — DEUTERONOMY 16 : 15 . 
 ( a ) What issues did Satan raise ? 
 ( b ) What did Jehovah foretell following the rebellion of Adam and Eve ? 
 WHEN Satan led Adam and Eve into rebellion against their Creator , he raised two issues of vital importance . 
 First , he challenged Jehovah’s truthfulness and the rightness of his way of ruling . 
 Second , Satan implied that humans would serve God only out of self - interest . 
 The latter issue was stated explicitly in the time of Job . 
 Nevertheless , Jehovah acted quickly to handle the situation . 
 Even while Adam and Eve were still in the garden of Eden , Jehovah foretold how He would resolve the issues . 
 He foretold the coming of a “ seed ” who , after having his heel bruised , would fatally bruise Satan in the head . ​ — Genesis 3 : 15 . 
 What light did Jehovah shed on how he would fulfill the prophecy recorded at Genesis 3 : 15 ? 
 As time went by , Jehovah shed increasing light on that prophecy , thus demonstrating the certainty of its eventual fulfillment . 
 For example , God told Abraham that the “ seed ” would appear among his descendants . 
 Abraham’s grandson Jacob became father to the 12 tribes of Israel . 
 In 1513 B.C.E . , when those tribes became a nation , Jehovah gave them a system of laws that included various annual festivals . 
 The apostle Paul said that those festivals were “ a shadow of the things to come . ” 
 They contained foregleams of the outworking of Jehovah’s purpose for the Seed . 
 Observing those festivals caused great joy in Israel . 
 A brief consideration of them will strengthen our faith in the reliability of Jehovah’s promises . 
 The Seed Appears 
 Who was the promised Seed , and how was his heel bruised ? 
 More than 4,000 years after Jehovah’s original prophecy , the promised Seed appeared . 
 It was Jesus . 
 As a perfect man , Jesus kept his integrity to the death and thus proved that Satan’s accusations were lies . 
 In addition , since Jesus was sinless , his death was a sacrifice of great value . 
 By means of it , Jesus provided deliverance from sin and death for faithful descendants of Adam and Eve . 
 Jesus ’ death on the torture stake was the ‘ bruising in the heel ’ of the promised Seed . ​ — Hebrews 9 : 11 - 14 . 
 How was Jesus ’ sacrifice foreshadowed ? 
 Jesus died on Nisan 14 , 33 C.E . 
 * In Israel , Nisan 14 was the joyous day of the Passover celebration . 
 Each year on that day , families shared a meal that included a young , unblemished lamb . 
 In this way , they remembered the role that the blood of a lamb played in the deliverance of the Israelite firstborn when the angel of death slew the firstborn of the Egyptians on Nisan 14 , 1513 B.C.E . 
 The Passover lamb foreshadowed Jesus , of whom the apostle Paul said : “ Christ our passover has been sacrificed . ” 
 Like the blood of the Passover lamb , Jesus ’ shed blood provides salvation for many . ​ — John 3 : 16 , 36 . 
 ‘ The Firstfruits of the Dead ’ 
 5 , 6 . ( a ) When was Jesus resurrected , and how was that event foreshadowed in the Law ? 
 ( b ) How did the resurrection of Jesus make the fulfillment of Genesis 3 : 15 possible ? 
 On the third day , Jesus was raised back to life in order to present the value of his sacrifice to his Father . 
 His resurrection was foreshadowed during another festival . 
 The day after Nisan 14 saw the beginning of the Festival of Unfermented Cakes . 
 On the next day , Nisan 16 , Israelites brought a sheaf of the firstfruits of the barley harvest , the earliest harvest in Israel , for the priest to wave before Jehovah . 
 How appropriate that in the year 33 C.E . , on that very day , Jehovah thwarted Satan’s vicious efforts to silence forever his “ faithful and true witness ” ! 
 On Nisan 16 , 33 C.E . , Jehovah resurrected Jesus from the dead to immortal spirit life . ​ — Revelation 3 : 14 ; 1 Peter 3 : 18 . 
 Jesus became “ the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep in death . ” 
 Unlike those who had been resurrected before , Jesus did not die again . 
 Rather , he ascended to heaven to Jehovah’s right hand , where he waited until he would be installed as King of Jehovah’s heavenly Kingdom . 
 Since his installment as King , Jesus is now in a position to bruise the great enemy , Satan , in the head permanently and to destroy his seed . ​ — Revelation 11 : 15 , 18 ; 20 : 1 - 3 , 10 . 
 More Members of Abraham’s Seed 
 What was the Festival of Weeks ? 
 Jesus was the Seed who was promised in Eden and by means of whom Jehovah would “ break up the works of the Devil . ” 
 However , when Jehovah spoke to Abraham , He indicated that Abraham’s “ seed ” would be more than just one person . 
 It would be “ like the stars of the heavens and like the grains of sand that are on the seashore . ” 
 The appearance of other members of the “ seed ” was foreshadowed by yet another joyful festival . 
 Fifty days after Nisan 16 , Israel celebrated the Festival of Weeks . 
 The Law about this states : “ To the day after the seventh sabbath you should count , fifty days , and you must present a new grain offering to Jehovah . 
 Out of your dwelling places you should bring two loaves as a wave offering . 
 Of two tenths of an ephah of fine flour they should prove to be . 
 They should be baked leavened , as first ripe fruits to Jehovah . ” 
 * ​ — Leviticus 23 : 16 , 17 , 20 . 
 What outstanding event took place at Pentecost 33 C.E . ? 
 When Jesus was on earth , the Festival of Weeks was known as Pentecost ( from a Greek word meaning “ fiftieth ” ) . 
 At Pentecost 33 C.E . , the greater High Priest , the resurrected Jesus Christ , poured out holy spirit upon the small group of 120 disciples gathered in Jerusalem . 
 Thus those disciples became anointed sons of God and brothers of Jesus Christ . 
 They became a new nation , “ the Israel of God . ” 
 From small beginnings , that nation would finally number 144,000 . ​ — Revelation 7 : 1 - 4 . 
 9 , 10 . 
 How was the congregation of anointed Christians foreshadowed during Pentecost ? 
 The congregation of anointed Christians was foreshadowed by the two leavened loaves waved before Jehovah each Pentecost . 
 The loaves ’ being leavened showed that anointed Christians would still have the leaven of inherited sin . 
 Nevertheless , they could approach Jehovah on the basis of Jesus ’ ransom sacrifice . 
 Why two loaves ? 
 That may have pointed to the fact that the anointed sons of God would eventually be drawn from two groups ​ — first from natural Jews and later from Gentiles . ​ — Galatians 3 : 26 - 29 ; Ephesians 2 : 13 - 18 . 
 The two loaves offered at Pentecost came from the firstfruits of the wheat harvest . 
 Correspondingly , those spirit - begotten Christians are called “ certain firstfruits of his creatures . ” 
 They are the first to have their sins forgiven on the basis of Jesus ’ shed blood , and that makes it possible for them to be granted immortal life in the heavens , where they rule with Jesus in his Kingdom . 
 In that position , one day soon they will “ shepherd the [ nations ] with an iron rod ” and see ‘ Satan crushed under their feet . ’ 
 The apostle John said : “ These are the ones that keep following the Lamb no matter where he goes . 
 These were bought from among mankind as firstfruits to God and to the Lamb . ” ​ — Revelation 14 : 4 . 
 A Day Emphasizing Deliverance 
 11 , 12 . ( a ) What happened on Atonement Day ? 
 ( b ) What benefits did Israel receive from the sacrifices of the bull and the goats ? 
 On the tenth day of Ethanim ( later called Tishri ) , * Israel celebrated a festival that foreshadowed how the benefits of Jesus ’ ransom sacrifice would be applied . 
 On that day the whole nation came together for the Day of Atonement to have sacrifices offered in their behalf for the covering of their sins . ​ — Leviticus 16 : 29 , 30 . 
 On Atonement Day , the high priest slaughtered a young bull , and in the Most Holy , he spattered some of its blood seven times before the cover of the Ark , thus representatively offering the blood before Jehovah . 
 That offering was for the sins of the high priest and “ his house , ” the underpriests and the Levites . 
 Then the high priest took two goats . 
 One he slaughtered as a sin offering “ for the people . ” 
 Some of its blood too was sprinkled before the cover of the Ark in the Most Holy . 
 Afterward , the high priest laid his hands on the head of the second goat and confessed the errors of the sons of Israel . 
 Then he had the goat led off into the wilderness to carry away the nation’s sins in a symbolic way . ​ — Leviticus 16 : 3 - 16 , 21 , 22 . 
 How did events on Atonement Day foreshadow the role that Jesus plays ? 
 As those acts foreshadowed , the great High Priest , Jesus , uses the merit of his own lifeblood to provide forgiveness of sins . 
 First , the value of his blood is applied to the “ spiritual house ” of 144,000 anointed Christians , enabling these to be declared righteous and enjoy a clean standing before Jehovah . 
 This is foreshadowed by the sacrifice of the bull . 
 Thus the way is opened for them to receive their heavenly inheritance . 
 Second , the value of Jesus ’ blood is applied in behalf of millions of others who exercise faith in Christ , as shown by the sacrifice of the goat . 
 These will be blessed with everlasting life here on earth , the inheritance that Adam and Eve lost . 
 On the basis of his shed blood , Jesus carries away the sins of mankind , just as the live goat in a token way carried the sins of Israel off into the wilderness . ​ — Isaiah 53 : 4 , 5 . 
 Rejoicing Before Jehovah 
 14 , 15 . 
 What happened during the Festival of Booths , and of what did this remind the Israelites ? 
 After the Atonement Day , the Israelites celebrated the Festival of Booths , the most joyful festival of the Jewish year . 
 That festival took place from the 15th to the 21st of Ethanim and concluded with a solemn assembly on the 22nd of the month . 
 It marked the end of the ingathering of the harvest and was a time of thanksgiving for the abundant goodness of God . 
 For that reason , Jehovah commanded the celebrants : “ Jehovah your God will bless you in all your produce and in every deed of your hand , and you must become nothing but joyful . ” 
 What a happy time that must have been ! 
 During that festival , the Israelites dwelled in booths for seven days . 
 They were thus reminded that at one time they had dwelled in booths in the wilderness . 
 The festival gave them ample opportunity to reflect on Jehovah’s fatherly care . 
 And since all , wealthy and poor alike , dwelled in booths that were similar , the Israelites were reminded that in relation to the festival , they were all equal . ​ — Nehemiah 8 : 14 - 16 . 
 What was foreshadowed by the Festival of Booths ? 
 The Festival of Booths was a harvest festival , a joyful celebration of ingathering , and it foreshadowed the joyous ingathering of those who exercise faith in Jesus Christ . 
 The ingathering began at Pentecost 33 C.E . , when Jesus ’ 120 disciples were anointed to become part of “ a holy priesthood . ” 
 As the Israelites lived in booths for a few days , anointed ones know that they are mere “ temporary residents ” in this ungodly world . 
 Their hope is a heavenly one . 
 That ingathering of anointed Christians reaches its conclusion during these “ last days , ” when the final ones of the 144,000 are gathered . ​ — 2 Timothy 3 : 1 . 
 17 , 18 . ( a ) What indicates that others besides anointed Christians benefit from Jesus ’ sacrifice ? 
 ( b ) Who today are benefiting from the antitypical Festival of Booths , and when will that joyful festival reach its climax ? 
 It is noteworthy that during this ancient festival , 70 bulls were offered . 
 The number 70 represents 7 multiplied by 10 , numbers that in the Bible represent heavenly and earthly perfection . 
 Hence , the sacrifice of Jesus will benefit faithful ones from all 70 families of mankind that descended from Noah . 
 In harmony with that , in our time the ingathering has widened out to include individuals from all nations who exercise faith in Jesus and have the hope of living on a paradise earth . 
 The apostle John saw this modern - day ingathering in vision . 
 First he heard the announcing of the sealing of the final ones of the 144,000 . 
 Then he saw “ a great crowd , which no man was able to number , ” standing before Jehovah and Jesus , with “ palm branches in their hands . ” 
 These “ come out of the great tribulation ” into the new world . 
 They too are now mere temporary residents in this old system of things , and they look forward with confidence to the time when “ the Lamb . . . will shepherd them , and will guide them to fountains of waters of life . ” 
 At that time , “ God will wipe out every tear from their eyes . ” 
 The antitypical Festival of Booths will reach its climax after the end of the Thousand Year Reign of Christ when they along with faithful resurrected ones are granted everlasting life . ​ — Revelation 20 : 5 . 
 How do we benefit from a consideration of the festivals celebrated in Israel ? 
 We too can be “ nothing but joyful ” as we meditate on the meaning of the ancient Jewish festivals . 
 It is thrilling to consider that Jehovah provided foregleams of how his prophecy given back in Eden would be fulfilled , and it is exciting to see its actual fulfillment taking place step - by - step . 
 Today , we know that the Seed has appeared and that he has been bruised in the heel . 
 Now he is a heavenly King . 
 Further , most of the 144,000 have already proved their faithfulness to the death . 
 What remains to be done ? 
 How soon will the prophecy be completely fulfilled ? 
 This will be discussed in the following article . 
 [ Footnotes ] 
 Nisan corresponds to March / ​ April on our present calendar . 
 In this wave offering of the two leavened loaves , often the priest held the loaves in the palms of his hands , raised his arms , and moved the loaves from side to side . 
 This motion symbolized the presenting of the sacrificial things to Jehovah . ​ — See Insight on the Scriptures , Volume 2 , page 528 , published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 Ethanim , or Tishri , corresponds to September / ​ October on our present calendar . 
 Can You Explain ? 
 • What was foreshadowed by the Passover lamb ? 
 • What ingathering was foreshadowed by the Festival of Pentecost ? 
 • What features of the Atonement Day pointed to the way that Jesus ’ ransom sacrifice is applied ? 
 • In what way is the ingathering of Christians foreshadowed by the Festival of Booths ? 
 [ Chart on page 22 , 23 ] 
 ( For fully formatted text , see publication ) 
 Passover 
 Nisan 14 
 Event : 
 Passover lamb slain 
 Foreshadowed : 
 Jesus sacrificed 
 Festival of Unfermented Cakes ( Nisan 15 - 21 ) 
 Nisan 15 
 Event : 
 Sabbath 
 Nisan 16 
 Event : 
 Barley offered 
 Foreshadowed : 
 Jesus resurrected 
 50 days 
 Festival of Weeks ( Pentecost ) 
 Sivan 6 
 Event : 
 Two loaves offered 
 Foreshadowed : 
 Jesus presented his anointed brothers to Jehovah 
 Day of Atonement 
 Tishri 10 
 Event : 
 A bull and two goats offered 
 Foreshadowed : 
 Jesus offered the value of his blood in behalf of all mankind 
 Festival of Booths ( Ingathering , Tabernacles ) 
 Tishri 15 - 21 
 Event : 
 Israelites joyfully dwelled in booths and rejoiced in the harvest , 70 bulls offered 
 Foreshadowed : 
 Ingathering of anointed and “ great crowd ” 
 [ Pictures on page 21 ] 
 Like the blood of the Passover lamb , Jesus ’ shed blood provides salvation for many 
 [ Pictures on page 22 ] 
 The firstfruits of the barley harvest offered on Nisan 16 foreshadowed Jesus ’ resurrection 
 [ Pictures on page 23 ] 
 The two loaves offered at Pentecost foreshadowed the congregation of anointed Christians 
 [ Pictures on page 24 ] 
 The Festival of Booths foreshadowed the joyous ingathering of anointed ones and of “ a great crowd ” from all nations 
 “ The First Resurrection ” ​ — Now Under Way ! 
 “ Those who are dead in union with Christ will rise first . ” ​ — 1 THESSALONIANS 4 : 16 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) What hope is there for those who have died ? 
 ( b ) On what basis do you believe in the resurrection ? 
 ( See footnote . ) 
 “ THE living are conscious that they will die . ” 
 Ever since Adam sinned , that has been true . 
 Throughout history , everyone born has known that he would eventually die , and many have wondered : ‘ What comes next ? 
 What is the condition of the dead ? ’ 
 The Bible answers : “ As for the dead , they are conscious of nothing at all . ” ​ — Ecclesiastes 9 : 5 . 
 Is there any hope , then , for those who have died ? 
 Yes . 
 In fact , there must be if God’s original purpose for mankind is to be fulfilled . 
 Over the centuries , loyal servants of God have exercised faith in Jehovah’s promise about a Seed who would destroy Satan and undo the harm he did . 
 Most have died . 
 If they are to see the fulfillment of that promise and of others that Jehovah has made , they need to be raised from the dead . 
 Is such a thing possible ? 
 Yes , it is . 
 The apostle Paul said : “ There is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous . ” 
 Paul once resurrected a young man named Eutychus , who had fallen from a third - floor window and was “ picked up dead . ” 
 This is the last of nine resurrections recorded in the Bible . ​ — Acts 20 : 7 - 12 . 
 * 
 What comfort have you personally drawn from Jesus ’ words recorded at John 5 : 28 , 29 , and why ? 
 Those nine resurrections provide a basis for faith in Paul’s statement . 
 They strengthen our confidence in Jesus ’ assurance : “ The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear [ Jesus ’ ] voice and come out . ” 
 What heartwarming words ! 
 And how comforting for the millions whose loved ones have fallen asleep in death ! 
 4 , 5 . 
 What different resurrections does the Bible mention , and which will be discussed in this article ? 
 The majority of those who are resurrected will come back to an earth made peaceful under God’s Kingdom . 
 However , other resurrections were to take place before that happens . 
 First , Jesus Christ had to be resurrected to present the value of his sacrifice to God in our behalf . 
 Jesus died and was resurrected in 33 C.E . 
 Next , anointed members of “ the Israel of God ” must join the Lord Jesus Christ in heavenly glory , where they will “ always be with the Lord . ” 
 That event is called “ the earlier resurrection ” or “ the first resurrection . ” 
 When that resurrection is completed , the time will be at hand for millions to be resurrected back to the earth with the prospect of gaining everlasting life in Paradise . 
 Hence , whether our hope is heavenly or earthly , we have a keen interest in “ the first resurrection . ” 
 What kind of resurrection is it ? 
 When does it occur ? 
 “ With What Sort of Body ? ” 
 6 , 7 . ( a ) Before anointed Christians can go to heaven , what must occur ? 
 ( b ) With what kind of body will they be resurrected ? 
 In his first letter to the Corinthians , Paul raises a question about the first resurrection : “ How are the dead to be raised up ? 
 Yes , with what sort of body are they coming ? ” 
 He then answers the question : “ What you sow is not made alive unless first it dies . . . but God gives it a body just as it has pleased him . . . 
 The glory of the heavenly bodies is one sort , and that of the earthly bodies is a different sort . ” ​ — 1 Corinthians 15 : 35 - 40 . 
 Paul’s words show that Christians anointed with holy spirit must die before they can receive their heavenly reward . 
 At their death , their earthly body returns to the dust . 
 At God’s appointed time , they are resurrected with a body of a kind suitable for life in the heavens . 
 God also grants them immortality . 
 That is not something they possess from birth , as if a so - called immortal soul were breathed into them . 
 “ This which is mortal must put on immortality , ” says Paul . 
 Immortality is a gift from God , “ put on ” by those who share in the first resurrection . ​ — 1 Corinthians 15 : 50 , 53 ; Genesis 2 : 7 ; 2 Corinthians 5 : 1 , 2 , 8 . 
 How do we know that God does not select the 144,000 from members of different religions ? 
 Only 144,000 share in the first resurrection . 
 Jehovah began selecting them at Pentecost 33 C.E . , shortly after he resurrected Jesus . 
 All of them have “ [ Jesus ’ ] name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads . ” 
 Hence , they are not selected from many different religions . 
 All are Christians , and all proudly bear the name of the Father ​ — Jehovah . 
 When they are resurrected , they receive an assignment of work in the heavens . 
 The prospect of serving God in such a direct way is simply thrilling to them . 
 Now Under Way ? 
 How do Revelation 12 : 7 and 17 : 14 help us to approximate the time when the first resurrection begins ? 
 When does the first resurrection occur ? 
 There is strong evidence that it is now under way . 
 For example , compare two chapters of Revelation . 
 First , look at Revelation chapter 12 . 
 There we read that the newly enthroned Jesus Christ , along with his holy angels , wages war against Satan and his demons . 
 As this journal has often shown , that battle began in 1914 . 
 * Notice , though , that none of Christ’s anointed followers are said to be with Jesus in that heavenly war . 
 Now look at chapter 17 of Revelation . 
 We read there that after the destruction of “ Babylon the Great , ” the Lamb will conquer the nations . 
 Then it adds : “ Also , those called and chosen and faithful with him will do so . ” 
 “ Called and chosen and faithful ” ones must already have been resurrected if they are to be with Jesus for the final defeat of Satan’s world . 
 Reasonably , then , anointed ones who die before Armageddon are resurrected sometime between 1914 and Armageddon . 
 10 , 11 . ( a ) Who are the 24 elders , and what does one of them reveal to John ? 
 ( b ) What can we deduce from this ? 
 Can we say more precisely when the first resurrection begins ? 
 An interesting clue is found at Revelation 7 : 9 - 15 , where the apostle John describes his vision of “ a great crowd , which no man was able to number . ” 
 The identity of that great crowd is revealed to John by one of the 24 elders , and these elders represent the 144,000 joint heirs with Christ in their heavenly glory . 
 * John himself had a heavenly hope ; but since he was still a man on earth when the elder spoke to him , in the vision John must represent anointed ones on earth who have not yet received their heavenly reward . 
 What , then , can we deduce from the fact that one of the 24 elders identifies the great crowd to John ? 
 It seems that resurrected ones of the 24 - elders group may be involved in the communicating of divine truths today . 
 Why is that important ? 
 Because the correct identity of the great crowd was revealed to God’s anointed servants on earth in 1935 . 
 If one of the 24 elders was used to convey that important truth , he would have had to be resurrected to heaven by 1935 at the latest . 
 That would indicate that the first resurrection began sometime between 1914 and 1935 . 
 Can we be more precise ? 
 Explain why the spring of 1918 may be viewed as a possible time for the first resurrection to begin . 
 At this point , it may be helpful to consider what might be viewed as a Bible parallel . 
 Jesus Christ was anointed as the future King of God’s Kingdom in the fall of 29 C.E . 
 Three and a half years later , in the spring of 33 C.E . , he was resurrected as a mighty spirit person . 
 Could it , then , be reasoned that since Jesus was enthroned in the fall of 1914 , the resurrection of his faithful anointed followers began three and a half years later , in the spring of 1918 ? 
 That is an interesting possibility . 
 Although this cannot be directly confirmed in the Bible , it is not out of harmony with other scriptures that indicate that the first resurrection got under way soon after Christ’s presence began . 
 In what way does 1 Thessalonians 4 : 15 - 17 suggest that the first resurrection began early in Christ’s presence ? 
 For example , Paul wrote : “ We the living who survive to the presence of the Lord [ not , to the end of his presence ] shall in no way precede those who have fallen asleep in death ; because the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a commanding call , with an archangel’s voice and with God’s trumpet , and those who are dead in union with Christ will rise first . 
 Afterward we the living who are surviving will , together with them , be caught away in clouds to meet the Lord in the air ; and thus we shall always be with the Lord . ” 
 Therefore , anointed Christians who died before Christ’s presence were raised to heavenly life ahead of those who were still alive during Christ’s presence . 
 This means that the first resurrection must have begun early in Christ’s presence , and it continues “ during his presence . ” 
 Rather than occurring all at once , the first resurrection takes place over a period of time . 
 “ A White Robe Was Given to Each of Them ” 
 ( a ) When are the visions recorded in Revelation chapter 6 fulfilled ? 
 ( b ) What is portrayed at Revelation 6 : 9 ? 
 Consider , too , the evidence contained in Revelation chapter 6 . 
 There Jesus is seen riding forth as a conquering King . 
 The nations are embroiled in warfare of epic proportions . 
 There is widespread famine . 
 Deadly plagues ravage mankind . 
 All these prophesied events clearly fit world conditions since 1914 . 
 But something else happens . 
 Our attention is drawn to an altar of sacrifice . 
 At its base are “ the souls of those slaughtered because of the word of God and because of the witness work that they used to have . ” 
 Since “ the soul [ or , life ] of the flesh is in the blood , ” what is really represented as being at the foot of the altar is the blood of faithful servants of Jesus who were slaughtered because of their bold and zealous witnessing . ​ — Leviticus 17 : 11 . 
 15 , 16 . 
 Explain why the words of Revelation 6 : 10 , 11 refer to the first resurrection . 
 Like the blood of righteous Abel , the blood of these Christian martyrs is crying out for justice . 
 “ They cried with a loud voice , saying : ‘ Until when , Sovereign Lord holy and true , are you refraining from judging and avenging our blood upon those who dwell on the earth ? ’ ” 
 What comes next ? 
 “ A white robe was given to each of them ; and they were told to rest a little while longer , until the number was filled also of their fellow slaves and their brothers who were about to be killed as they also had been . ” ​ — Revelation 6 : 10 , 11 . 
 Were these white robes handed out to pools of blood lying at the base of an altar ? 
 Of course not ! 
 The robes were given to the individuals whose blood was shed , as it were , on the altar . 
 They sacrificed their lives in Jesus ’ name and were now resurrected as spirits . 
 How do we know that ? 
 Earlier in the book of Revelation , we read : “ He that conquers will thus be arrayed in white outer garments ; and I will by no means blot out his name from the book of life . ” 
 Recall , too , that the 24 elders were “ dressed in white outer garments , and upon their heads [ were ] golden crowns . ” 
 So after war , famine , and pestilence began to ravage the earth , members of the 144,000 who were dead , represented by the blood at the base of the altar , were raised to heavenly life and clothed in symbolic white robes . 
 In what sense must those who receive white robes “ rest ” ? 
 Those newly resurrected ones must “ rest . ” 
 They must wait patiently for God’s day of vengeance . 
 Their “ fellow slaves , ” anointed Christians still on earth , have yet to prove their integrity under trial . 
 When the time for divine judgment arrives , the “ rest ” will be over . 
 At that time , those resurrected ones will share with the Lord Jesus Christ in bringing destruction upon the wicked , including those who shed the blood of innocent Christians . ​ — 2 Thessalonians 1 : 7 - 10 . 
 What It Means for Us 
 18 , 19 . ( a ) For what reasons can you conclude that the first resurrection is now under way ? 
 ( b ) How does your understanding of the first resurrection make you feel ? 
 God’s Word does not disclose a precise date for the first resurrection , but it does reveal that it occurs over a period of time , during Christ’s presence . 
 The first to be resurrected are anointed Christians who died before Christ’s presence began . 
 As Christ’s presence progresses , anointed Christians who faithfully finish their earthly course are changed “ in the twinkling of an eye ” into powerful spirit creatures . 
 Will all the anointed receive their heavenly reward before the war of Armageddon ? 
 We do not know . 
 We do know , however , that in God’s due time , all the 144,000 will be found standing on the heavenly Mount Zion . 
 We also know that the majority of the 144,000 are already united with Christ . 
 Only a relatively few remain on earth . 
 What a powerful indication that the time for the execution of God’s judgment is rapidly approaching ! 
 Soon , Satan’s entire world system will be destroyed . 
 Satan himself will be abyssed . 
 Then , the general resurrection can begin , and faithful humans can , on the basis of Jesus ’ ransom sacrifice , be raised to perfection similar to that lost by Adam . 
 Jehovah’s prophecy recorded at Genesis 3 : 15 is being wonderfully fulfilled . 
 What a grand privilege it is to be living in these times ! 
 [ Footnotes ] 
 For the other eight , see 1 Kings 17 : 21 - 23 ; 2 Kings 4 : 32 - 37 ; 13 : 21 ; Mark 5 : 35 , 41 - 43 ; Luke 7 : 11 - 17 ; 24 : 34 ; John 11 : 43 - 45 ; Acts 9 : 36 - 42 . 
 For Scriptural proof that Christ’s presence began in 1914 , see the book What Does the Bible Really Teach ? 
 pages 215 - 18 , published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 For information on how we know that the 24 elders represent anointed Christians in their heavenly position , see Revelation ​ — Its Grand Climax At Hand ! 
 page 77 , published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 Can You Explain ? 
 How do the following scriptures help us to discern the timing of “ the first resurrection ” ? 
 • Revelation 12 : 7 ; 17 : 14 
 • Revelation 7 : 13 , 14 
 • 1 Corinthians 15 : 23 ; 1 Thessalonians 4 : 15 - 17 
 • Revelation 6 : 2 , 9 - 11 
 [ Pictures on page 26 ] 
 What resurrections take place before mankind in general is raised from the dead ? 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 In what way is a white robe given to certain ones who were sleeping in death ? 
 Teach What the Bible Really Teaches 
 “ Make disciples of people of all the nations , . . . teaching them . ” ​ — MATTHEW 28 : 19 , 20 . 
 What can be said about the availability of the Bible ? 
 JEHOVAH’S WORD , the Holy Bible , is one of the oldest and most widely distributed books in the world . 
 At least part of it has been translated into more than 2,300 languages . 
 Over 90 percent of earth’s inhabitants have it available in their native tongue . 
 2 , 3 . ( a ) Why is there confusion about Bible teachings ? 
 ( b ) What questions will we consider ? 
 Millions of people read a portion of the Bible every day . 
 Some have read it from cover to cover many times . 
 Thousands of religious groups claim to base their teachings on the Bible , but they do not agree on what it teaches . 
 Adding to the confusion are the strong disagreements between members of the same religion . 
 Some have doubts about the Bible , its origin , and its value . 
 Many view it as a sacred book merely for ceremonial use in making vows or in swearing to tell the truth in court . 
 Actually , the Bible contains God’s powerful word , or message , for mankind . 
 As Jehovah’s Witnesses , we therefore want people to learn what the Bible teaches . 
 We are delighted to carry out the commission that Jesus Christ gave his followers when he said : “ Go . . . and make disciples of people of all the nations , . . . teaching them . ” 
 In our public ministry , we find honesthearted people who are distressed over the religious confusion rampant in the world . 
 They want to know the truth about our Creator and desire to learn what the Bible says about the meaning of life . 
 Let us consider three questions that concern many people . 
 In each case , we will take note of what religious leaders mistakenly say , and then we will review what the Bible really teaches . 
 The questions are : ( 1 ) Does God care about us ? 
 ( 2 ) Why are we here ? 
 ( 3 ) What happens to us when we die ? 
 Does God Care ? 
 4 , 5 . 
 Why do people think that God does not care about us ? 
 Let us begin with the question , Does God care about us ? 
 Sadly , many people think that the answer is no . 
 Why do they feel that way ? 
 One reason is that they live in a world full of hatred , war , and suffering . 
 ‘ If God really cared , ’ they reason , ‘ surely he would prevent such tragic things from happening . ’ 
 Another reason why people think that God does not care about us is that religious leaders have made them feel that way . 
 What do clergymen often say when tragedy strikes ? 
 When one woman lost her two small children in an automobile accident , her minister said : “ It was God’s will . 
 God needed two more angels . ” 
 When clergymen make such comments , they are actually blaming God for the bad things that happen . 
 Yet , the disciple James wrote : “ When under trial , let no one say : ‘ I am being tried by God . ’ 
 For with evil things God cannot be tried nor does he himself try anyone . ” 
 Jehovah God never causes what is bad . 
 Indeed , “ far be it from the true God to act wickedly . ” ​ — Job 34 : 10 . 
 Who is behind the wickedness and suffering in this world ? 
 Why , then , is there so much wickedness and suffering ? 
 One reason is that mankind in general has rejected God as Ruler , not wanting to submit to his righteous laws and principles . 
 Humans have unwittingly submitted to God’s Adversary , Satan , for “ the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one . ” 
 Knowledge of this fact makes it easier to understand why bad situations exist . 
 Satan is evil , hateful , deceptive , and cruel . 
 So we should expect the world to reflect the personality of its ruler . 
 No wonder there is so much wickedness ! 
 What are some reasons for the suffering we experience ? 
 Human imperfection is another reason for the suffering we experience . 
 Sinful humans tend to struggle for dominance , and that often results in wars , oppression , and suffering . 
 Ecclesiastes 8 : 9 aptly says : “ Man has dominated man to his injury . ” 
 A further reason for suffering is “ time and unforeseen occurrence . ” 
 People often experience calamity because they are in the wrong place at the wrong time . 
 8 , 9 . 
 How do we know that Jehovah really cares about us ? 
 It is comforting to learn that Jehovah does not cause suffering . 
 But does God truly care about what is going on in our lives ? 
 The heartwarming answer is yes ! 
 We know that Jehovah cares because his inspired Word tells us why he has allowed humans to pursue a bad course . 
 God’s reasons involve two issues : his sovereignty and the integrity of humans . 
 Because he is the almighty Creator , Jehovah is not obligated to tell us why he permits suffering . 
 Yet , he tells us because he cares about us . 
 Consider further evidence that God cares about us . 
 He “ felt hurt at his heart ” when badness filled the earth in the days of Noah . 
 Does God feel differently today ? 
 No , for he does not change . 
 He detests injustice and hates to see people suffer . 
 The Bible teaches that God will soon undo all the harm that has resulted from human rule and from the influence of the Devil . 
 Is that not convincing proof that God cares about us ? 
 How does Jehovah feel about human suffering ? 
 Religious leaders misrepresent God when they say that the tragedies we experience are his will . 
 On the contrary , Jehovah longs to end human suffering . 
 “ He cares for you , ” says 1 Peter 5 : 7 . 
 That is what the Bible really teaches ! 
 Why Are We Here ? 
 What do the world’s religions often say about human life on the earth ? 
 Let us now consider a second question that many wonder about , Why are we here ? 
 The world’s religions often answer that man is on the earth only temporarily . 
 They see our globe as little more than a stopover , or stepping - stone , on the way to life somewhere else . 
 Some clergymen falsely teach that God will someday destroy this planet . 
 As a result of such teachings , many people have concluded that they are better off living life to the full while they can because only death awaits them . 
 What does the Bible really teach about why we are here ? 
 12 - 14 . 
 What does the Bible teach regarding God’s purpose for the earth and for mankind ? 
 God has a wonderful purpose for the earth and for mankind . 
 He “ did not create [ the earth ] simply for nothing ” but “ formed it even to be inhabited . ” 
 Moreover , Jehovah “ has founded the earth upon its established places ; it will not be made to totter to time indefinite , or forever . ” 
 Learning these things about God’s purpose for the earth and for mankind can help us to understand why we are here . 
 Genesis chapters 1 and 2 show that Jehovah took great care to prepare the earth for human habitation . 
 At the end of the creative period involving our globe , everything was “ very good . ” 
 God placed the first man and woman , Adam and Eve , in the lovely garden of Eden and supplied them with an abundance of good food . 
 The first human pair were told : “ Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth and subdue it . ” 
 They were to have perfect children , to extend the boundaries of their garden home earth wide , and to exercise loving dominion over the animals . ​ — Genesis 1 : 26 - 28 . 
 It is Jehovah’s purpose to have a perfect human family dwell on earth eternally . 
 God’s Word says : “ The righteous themselves will possess the earth , and they will reside forever upon it . ” 
 Yes , humankind was meant to enjoy everlasting life in Paradise on earth . 
 That is God’s purpose , and it is what the Bible really teaches ! 
 What Happens to Us at Death ? 
 What do most of the world’s religions teach about what happens to us when we die ? 
 Now let us discuss a third question that concerns many : What happens to us when we die ? 
 Most of the world’s religions teach that something inside a person continues living after the body dies . 
 Some religious groups still cling to the idea that God punishes the wicked by subjecting them to eternal suffering in a fiery hell . 
 But is that the truth ? 
 What does the Bible really teach about death ? 
 16 , 17 . 
 According to the Bible , what is the condition of the dead ? 
 God’s Word states : “ The living are conscious that they will die ; but as for the dead , they are conscious of nothing at all , neither do they anymore have wages . ” 
 Since the dead “ are conscious of nothing at all , ” they cannot hear , see , speak , feel , or think . 
 They no longer earn any wages . 
 How could they ? 
 They are incapable of any work ! 
 Moreover , “ their love and their hate and their jealousy have already perished , ” for they cannot express any emotion . ​ — Ecclesiastes 9 : 5 , 6 , 10 . 
 What the Bible says on this subject is simple and clear ​ — the dead do not continue to live somewhere . 
 There is nothing that leaves our body at death and lives on so as to be reborn in another body , as stated by those who believe in reincarnation . 
 We might illustrate matters this way : The life that we enjoy is like the flame of a candle . 
 When the flame is extinguished , it does not go anywhere . 
 It is simply gone . 
 When a Bible student learns that the dead are not conscious , what conclusions can he draw ? 
 Think of the implications of that one simple but powerful truth . 
 When a Bible student learns that the dead are not conscious , he should easily be able to conclude that no matter how resentful his dead ancestors may have been during their lifetime , they cannot trouble him . 
 He should also quickly grasp the point that his dead loved ones can no longer hear , see , speak , feel , or think . 
 Therefore , they cannot be experiencing unbearable loneliness in purgatory or suffering in a place of fiery torment . 
 However , the Bible teaches that the dead who are in God’s memory will be resurrected . 
 What a wonderful hope ! ​ — John 5 : 28 , 29 . 
 A New Book for Our Use 
 19 , 20 . 
 As Christians , what responsibility do we have , and what Bible study aid is especially designed for our use in our ministry ? 
 We have considered only three questions that many people wonder about . 
 In each case , what the Bible teaches is clear and straightforward . 
 What a joy it is to share such truths with those who want to know what the Bible teaches ! 
 But there are many other important questions to which honesthearted ones need satisfying answers . 
 As Christians , we have a responsibility to help them find the answers to such questions . 
 It is challenging to teach Scriptural truth in a way that is clear and that appeals to the heart . 
 To help us meet that challenge , “ the faithful and discreet slave ” prepared a book that is especially designed for our use in our Christian ministry . 
 This 224 - page book is entitled What Does the Bible Really Teach ? 
 21 , 22 . 
 What are some noteworthy features of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach ? 
 Released at the 2005 / 06 “ Godly Obedience ” District Conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses , this book has various noteworthy features . 
 For instance , there is a five - page preface that is proving to be very helpful in starting home Bible studies . 
 You will likely find it easy to discuss the pictures and the scriptures found in the preface . 
 You may also use material in this section to show students how to locate Bible chapters and verses . 
 The writing style of this book is simple and clear . 
 An effort has been made to reach the student’s heart by involving him whenever possible . 
 Each chapter has several introductory questions and a box at the end entitled “ What the Bible Teaches . ” 
 The box contains the Scriptural answers to the introductory questions . 
 Fine pictures and captions as well as written illustrations in this publication will help the student to grasp new ideas . 
 Although the book’s main text has been kept quite simple , there is an appendix that will allow you to consider 14 important subjects in greater depth if the student requires additional information . 
 What suggestions are offered regarding the use of the Bible Teach book on Bible studies ? 
 The Bible Teach book is designed to help us teach people of different educational levels and from various religious backgrounds . 
 If a student does not have any knowledge of the Bible , it may take more than one study session to cover a chapter . 
 Do not rush through the material , but endeavor to reach the student’s heart . 
 If he does not understand a certain illustration used in the book , explain it or use an alternative . 
 Prepare well , do your best to use the book effectively , and pray for God’s help so that you can ‘ handle the word of the truth aright . ’ ​ — 2 Timothy 2 : 15 . 
 Be Grateful for Your Priceless Privileges 
 24 , 25 . 
 Jehovah has granted his people what priceless privileges ? 
 Jehovah has given his people priceless privileges . 
 He has enabled us to learn the truth about him . 
 We must never take that privilege for granted ! 
 After all , God has hidden his purposes from the haughty and has revealed them to humble ones . 
 In this regard , Jesus said : “ I publicly praise you , Father , Lord of heaven and earth , because you have hidden these things from the wise and intellectual ones and have revealed them to babes . ” 
 It is a rare honor to be counted among the humble ones who serve the Universal Sovereign , Jehovah . 
 God has also given us the privilege of teaching others about him . 
 Remember that he has been misrepresented by those who have taught lies about him . 
 Many people thus have an entirely wrong impression of Jehovah , thinking that he is uncaring and hard - hearted . 
 Are you willing , yes , even eager , to help set the record straight ? 
 Do you want honesthearted people everywhere to know the truth about God ? 
 Then by all means , demonstrate your godly obedience by zealously preaching and by teaching others what the Scriptures say on vital subjects . 
 Truth - seekers need to learn what the Bible really teaches . 
 What Are Your Answers ? 
 • How do we know that God cares about us ? 
 • Why are we here on earth ? 
 • What happens to us when we die ? 
 • What features of the Bible Teach book do you especially appreciate ? 
 [ Pictures on page 22 ] 
 The Bible teaches that suffering will end 
 [ Credit Lines ] 
 Top right , girl : © Bruno Morandi / ​ age fotostock ; left , woman : AP Photo / ​ Gemunu Amarasinghe ; bottom right , refugees : © Sven Torfinn / ​ Panos Pictures 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 The righteous will live forever in Paradise 
 Help Others Obey What the Bible Teaches 
 “ As for that on the fine soil , these are the ones that , after hearing the word with a fine and good heart , retain it and bear fruit with endurance . ” ​ — LUKE 8 : 15 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) For what purpose is the book What Does the Bible Really Teach ? 
 designed ? 
 ( b ) In recent years , how has Jehovah blessed the efforts of his people to make disciples ? 
 “ THE book is simply excellent . 
 My students love it . 
 I love it . 
 This book makes it possible to start Bible studies with people right at their doorstep . ” 
 So said a full - time pioneer minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses concerning the book What Does the Bible Really Teach ? 
 * Referring to the same publication , an elderly Kingdom proclaimer said : “ I have had the privilege of helping many people come to know Jehovah in the 50 years I have been active in the ministry . 
 But I must say , this study publication is outstanding . 
 The refreshing word pictures and illustrations are a delight . ” 
 Is that how you feel about the Bible Teach book ? 
 This Bible study aid is designed to help you fulfill Jesus ’ command : “ Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations , . . . teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded you . ” ​ — Matthew 28 : 19 , 20 . 
 No doubt , Jehovah’s heart rejoices as he sees some 6.6 million of his Witnesses willingly obeying Jesus ’ direction to make disciples . 
 Jehovah is obviously blessing their efforts . 
 During 2005 , for example , the good news was preached in 235 lands and , on average , over 6,061,500 Bible studies were conducted . 
 As a result , many people ‘ heard God’s word and accepted it , not as the word of men , but , just as it truthfully is , as the word of God . ’ 
 Over the past two years , more than half a million new disciples have conformed their lives to Jehovah’s standards and dedicated themselves to God . 
 What questions regarding the use of the Bible Teach book will be examined in this article ? 
 Have you recently experienced the joy of conducting a Bible study with someone ? 
 Worldwide , there are still individuals with “ a fine and good heart ” who upon hearing the word of God will “ retain it and bear fruit with endurance . ” 
 Let us consider how you can use the Bible Teach book in the disciple - making work . 
 Our discussion will examine three questions : ( 1 ) How can you start a Bible study ? 
 ( 2 ) What teaching methods work best ? 
 ( 3 ) How can you help a person to become not only a student but also a teacher of God’s written Word , the Bible ? 
 How You Can Start a Bible Study 
 Why might some hesitate to study the Bible , and how may you help them to overcome their reluctance ? 
 If you were asked to leap a wide stream in one bound , you might balk at the suggestion . 
 But if stepping - stones were placed at regular intervals across it , you would likely be more inclined to attempt the crossing . 
 Likewise , a busy person may hesitate to study the Bible . 
 The householder may think that too much time and effort are required to study it . 
 How can you help him to overcome his reluctance ? 
 By conducting a series of brief , informative discussions , you can use the Bible Teach book to lead the person into a regular study of God’s Word . 
 If you prepare well , each return visit on the person will become like a stepping - stone toward his friendship with Jehovah . 
 Why do you need to read the Bible Teach book ? 
 However , before you can help someone else benefit from the Bible Teach book , you need to become thoroughly familiar with it . 
 Have you read the book from beginning to end ? 
 One couple took the publication with them on vacation and started reading it while relaxing at the beach . 
 As a local woman selling goods to tourists approached them , she noticed the title What Does the Bible Really Teach ? 
 She told the couple that just a few hours earlier , she had prayed about that very question , asking God for an answer . 
 The couple gladly gave the woman a copy of the book . 
 Have you ‘ bought out time ’ to read this publication , possibly a second time , while waiting for an appointment or taking a break at work or at school ? 
 If you do , you will become familiar with this Bible study aid and may also create opportunities to talk to others about its contents . 
 6 , 7 . 
 How can you use the Bible Teach book to start Bible studies ? 
 When offering the book in the public ministry , make good use of the illustrations , scriptures , and questions on pages 4 , 5 , and 6 . 
 For example , you might start a conversation by asking , “ With all the problems facing mankind today , what do you feel is a reliable source of guidance ? ” 
 After listening carefully to the person’s response , read 2 Timothy 3 : 16 , 17 , and explain that the Bible offers a real solution to mankind’s problems . 
 Then , direct the householder’s attention to pages 4 and 5 , and ask : “ Of the conditions illustrated on these pages , which one distresses you most ? ” 
 When the householder points to one , have him hold the book while you read the associated scripture from your Bible . 
 Next , read page 6 , and ask the householder , “ Of the six questions mentioned at the bottom of this page , which one would you like to have answered ? ” 
 When the person picks one , show him the chapter that answers that question , leave the book with him , and make definite arrangements to call again and discuss that question . 
 The presentation just outlined would take about five minutes to complete . 
 In those few minutes , however , you will have learned what concerns the householder , read and applied two scriptures , and laid the basis for a return visit . 
 Your brief conversation with the householder may well be the most encouraging and consoling experience he has had in a long time . 
 As a result , even a busy person is likely to look forward to spending a few more minutes with you as you help him take his next step to get on ‘ the road that leads to life . ’ 
 In time , as the householder’s interest develops , the duration of the study should be extended . 
 This can be done by offering to sit down and study for a longer specified period . 
 Teaching Methods That Work Best 
 8 , 9 . ( a ) How can you prepare your Bible student to stand up to the obstacles and tests that he will likely encounter ? 
 ( b ) Where can the fire - resistant materials to build strong faith be found ? 
 Once a person starts to obey what the Bible teaches , he will probably face obstacles that could hinder his progress . 
 The apostle Paul said : “ All those desiring to live with godly devotion in association with Christ Jesus will also be persecuted . ” 
 Paul compared these trials to a fire that would destroy inferior building materials but leave such materials as gold , silver , and precious stone unharmed . 
 To help your Bible student develop the qualities required in order to stand up to the tests that he may encounter , you need to assist him by building with fire - resistant materials . 
 The psalmist likens “ the sayings of Jehovah ” to “ silver refined in a smelting furnace of earth , clarified seven times . ” 
 Indeed , the Bible contains all the precious materials that can be utilized to build strong faith . 
 And the Bible Teach book shows you how to be effective in using the Scriptures . 
 How can you focus the student’s attention on the Bible ? 
 During the study , focus the student’s attention on the scriptures provided in each chapter under discussion . 
 Use questions to help the student understand key Bible texts and apply them personally . 
 Be careful not to tell him what to do . 
 Instead , imitate Jesus ’ example . 
 When a man versed in the Law questioned him , Jesus replied : “ What is written in the Law ? 
 How do you read ? ” 
 The man answered from the Scriptures , and Jesus helped him see how to apply the principle to himself . 
 Giving an illustration , Jesus also helped the man see how the teaching should affect him . 
 The Bible Teach book is full of simple illustrations that you can use to assist a student in applying Scriptural principles to himself . 
 How much material should you cover in each study session ? 
 The Bible Teach book uses simple , direct language to explain God’s Word , just as Jesus conveyed complex ideas in simple terms . 
 Follow his example . 
 Convey the information simply , clearly , and accurately . 
 Do not rush through the material . 
 Rather , let the circumstances and the ability of the student determine the number of paragraphs you discuss during each study session . 
 Jesus knew the limitations of his disciples and did not burden them with more information than they needed at the time . ​ — John 16 : 12 . 
 How should the appendix be used ? 
 The Bible Teach book contains an appendix that has 14 topics . 
 Based on the needs of the student , you as his instructor should be able to determine how this material can best be used . 
 For example , if a student finds a subject difficult to grasp or has questions on specific matters because of previously held beliefs , it may suffice to direct his attention to the appropriate section of the appendix and let him consider the subject himself . 
 On the other hand , the student’s needs may dictate that you cover the material with him . 
 The appendix contains essential Scriptural subjects , such as “ ‘ Soul ’ and ‘ Spirit ’ ​ — What Do These Terms Really Mean ? ” 
 and “ Identifying ‘ Babylon the Great . ’ ” 
 You may want to discuss these topics with your student . 
 Since no questions are provided for the subjects discussed in the appendix , you will need to be familiar with the information in order to formulate meaningful questions . 
 What role does prayer play in strengthening faith ? 
 “ Unless Jehovah himself builds the house , it is to no avail that its builders have worked hard on it , ” states Psalm 127 : 1 . 
 Therefore , as you prepare to conduct a Bible study , pray for Jehovah’s help . 
 Let the prayers you say at the beginning and end of each study reflect your warm relationship with Jehovah . 
 Encourage the student to pray to Jehovah for the wisdom to understand His Word and the strength to apply its counsel . 
 If he does so , the student will be strengthened to endure trials and will continue to grow strong in faith . 
 Help Bible Students to Become Teachers 
 What progress do Bible students need to make ? 
 If our Bible students are to obey “ all the things ” Jesus commanded his disciples , they need to progress from being students of God’s Word to being teachers of it . 
 What can you do to help a student make that kind of spiritual progress ? 
 Why should you encourage your Bible student to attend Christian meetings ? 
 Right from the first study , invite the student to attend congregation meetings with you . 
 Explain to him that the meetings are where you receive your training as a teacher of God’s Word . 
 Over a number of weeks , take a few minutes at the end of each Bible study to describe the program of spiritual instruction that you receive at the various meetings and assemblies . 
 Speak enthusiastically about the benefits you gain on these occasions . 
 Once the student starts attending meetings regularly , he is likely to become a teacher of God’s Word . 
 16 , 17 . 
 What are some goals that a Bible student can set and attain ? 
 Help the Bible student to establish goals that he can attain . 
 For example , encourage him to share what he is learning with a friend or a relative . 
 Also , suggest that he set the goal of reading the entire Bible . 
 If you help him to establish and maintain a routine of regular Bible reading , this habit will benefit him long after he is baptized . 
 In addition , why not suggest that the student make it a goal to remember at least one Bible text that answers a key question from each chapter of the Bible Teach book ? 
 By doing so , he will become “ a workman with nothing to be ashamed of , handling the word of the truth aright . ” ​ — 2 Timothy 2 : 15 . 
 Rather than teaching a student simply to repeat scriptures or to give the gist of what they say , encourage him to explain pertinent Bible verses as he provides an answer to those who demand of him a reason for his faith . 
 Brief practice sessions may help , with you playing the part of a relative or a workmate who asks him to explain his beliefs . 
 As the student responds , show him how to answer with “ a mild temper and deep respect . ” ​ — 1 Peter 3 : 15 . 
 When a Bible student qualifies as an unbaptized publisher , what further help can you give him ? 
 In time , the student may qualify to engage in the field ministry . 
 Emphasize that it is a privilege to be allowed to share in this work . 
 Once the elders have determined that the student qualifies as an unbaptized publisher , help him prepare a simple presentation and then accompany him in the field service . 
 Continue to work with him regularly in various aspects of the public ministry , and teach him how to prepare for and make effective return visits . 
 Your own good example will be a positive influence . ​ — Luke 6 : 40 . 
 “ Save Both Yourself and Those Who Listen to You ” 
 19 , 20 . 
 What goal should we have , and why ? 
 Without a doubt , it takes much hard work to help a person come to “ an accurate knowledge of truth . ” 
 However , few joys in life can compare with the pleasure of helping someone obey what the Bible teaches . 
 Indeed , what a privilege we have to be “ God’s fellow workers ” in this worldwide teaching work ! ​ — 1 Corinthians 3 : 9 . 
 By means of Jesus Christ and powerful angels , Jehovah will soon call to account those “ who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus . ” 
 Lives hang in the balance . 
 Can you make it your goal to conduct at least one home Bible study in the book What Does the Bible Really Teach ? 
 As you engage in this work , you have the opportunity to “ save both yourself and those who listen to you . ” 
 Now more than ever , it is urgent that we help others obey what the Bible teaches . 
 [ Footnote ] 
 Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 What Did You Learn ? 
 • The Bible Teach book is designed for what purpose ? 
 • How can you start Bible studies using the Bible Teach book ? 
 • What teaching methods work best ? 
 • How can you help a student to become a teacher of God’s Word ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 Are you putting this book to good use ? 
 [ Picture on page 27 ] 
 A brief discussion can whet a person’s appetite for Bible knowledge 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 What can you do to direct the student’s attention to the Bible ? 
 [ Picture on page 30 ] 
 Help the Bible student to progress 
 Jehovah Is an Appreciative God 
 “ God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name . ” ​ — HEBREWS 6 : 10 . 
 How did Jehovah show his appreciation for the Moabitess Ruth ? 
 JEHOVAH deeply appreciates the efforts of those who sincerely seek to do his will , and he richly rewards them . 
 The faithful man Boaz was acquainted with this beautiful facet of God’s personality , for he said to the Moabitess Ruth , who lovingly cared for her widowed mother - in - law : “ May Jehovah reward the way you act , and may there come to be a perfect wage for you from Jehovah . ” 
 Was Ruth blessed by God ? 
 Absolutely ! 
 Why , her story is recorded in the Bible ! 
 Furthermore , she married Boaz and became an ancestress of both King David and Jesus Christ . 
 That example is but one of many in the Bible showing Jehovah’s appreciation for his servants . 
 2 , 3 . ( a ) What makes Jehovah’s expressions of appreciation remarkable ? 
 ( b ) Why is Jehovah able to express true appreciation ? 
 Illustrate . 
 Jehovah would consider it unrighteous on his part if he were to show a lack of appreciation . 
 Says Hebrews 6 : 10 : “ God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name , in that you have ministered to the holy ones and continue ministering . ” 
 What makes this statement remarkable is that God shows appreciation for devoted people even though they are sinners and fall short of his glory . ​ — Romans 3 : 23 . 
 Because of our imperfection , we may feel that our deeds of godly devotion are insignificant and unworthy of God’s blessing . 
 Jehovah , though , fully understands our motives and circumstances , and he truly values our whole - souled service . 
 To illustrate : A mother finds a gift ​ — an inexpensive necklace — ​ on her table . 
 She could view the gift as of little value and toss it aside . 
 However , the accompanying card reveals that the gift is from her little girl , who spent all her savings to buy it . 
 The mother now sees the gift in a new light . 
 Perhaps with tears in her eyes , she embraces her child and expresses her heartfelt appreciation . 
 4 , 5 . 
 How did Jesus imitate Jehovah in showing appreciation ? 
 Being fully aware of our motives and limitations , Jehovah appreciates it when we give him our best , whether that is a little or a lot . 
 In this regard , Jesus was a perfect reflection of his Father . 
 Recall the Bible account about the widow’s mite . 
 “ As [ Jesus ] looked up he saw the rich dropping their gifts into the treasury chests . 
 Then he saw a certain needy widow drop two small coins of very little value there , and he said : ‘ I tell you truthfully , This widow , although poor , dropped in more than they all did . 
 For all these dropped in gifts out of their surplus , but this woman out of her want dropped in all the means of living she had . ’ ” ​ — Luke 21 : 1 - 4 . 
 Yes , knowing the woman’s circumstances ​ — that she was widowed and poor — ​ Jesus understood the true value of her gift , and he was moved with appreciation . 
 The same can be said of Jehovah . 
 Is it not encouraging to know that whatever your circumstances , you can find favor in the eyes of our appreciative God and of his Son ? 
 Jehovah Rewards a God - Fearing Ethiopian 
 6 , 7 . 
 Why and how did Jehovah demonstrate his appreciation toward Ebed - melech ? 
 That Jehovah shows his appreciation for those who do his will is repeatedly demonstrated in the Scriptures . 
 Consider his dealings with the God - fearing Ethiopian Ebed - melech , a contemporary of Jeremiah and a servant in the household of unfaithful King Zedekiah of Judah . 
 Ebed - melech learned that the princes of Judah had wrongly charged the prophet Jeremiah with sedition and had thrown him into a cistern , there to die without food . 
 Knowing that Jeremiah was bitterly hated because of the message he preached , Ebed - melech risked his own life and appealed to the king . 
 Courageously , the Ethiopian spoke : “ O my lord the king , these men have done bad in all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet , whom they have thrown into the cistern , so that he will die where he is because of the famine . ” 
 At the king’s command , Ebed - melech took 30 men and rescued God’s prophet . ​ — Jeremiah 38 : 8 - 13 . 
 Jehovah saw that Ebed - melech acted in faith , which helped him overcome any fear he might have had . 
 Thus , Jehovah showed his appreciation and said to Ebed - melech through Jeremiah : “ Here I am bringing true my words upon this city for calamity and not for good . . . 
 And I will deliver you in that day , . . . and you will not be given into the hand of the men of whom you yourself are scared . 
 For I shall without fail furnish you an escape . . . ; and you will certainly come to have your soul as a spoil , because you have trusted in me . ” 
 Yes , Jehovah delivered Ebed - melech , as well as Jeremiah , from the wicked princes of Judah and later from the Babylonians , who razed Jerusalem . 
 “ [ Jehovah ] is guarding the souls of his loyal ones ; out of the hand of the wicked ones he delivers them , ” says Psalm 97 : 10 . 
 “ Your Father Who Looks On in Secret Will Repay You ” 
 8 , 9 . 
 As demonstrated by Jesus , what kind of prayers does Jehovah appreciate ? 
 Another evidence that Jehovah appreciates and values our expressions of godly devotion can be seen in what the Bible says about prayer . 
 “ The prayer of the upright ones is a pleasure to [ God ] , ” noted the wise man . 
 In Jesus ’ day many religious leaders prayed publicly , not out of genuine piety , but out of a desire to impress men . 
 “ They are having their reward in full , ” said Jesus . 
 “ However , when you pray , ” he instructed his followers , “ go into your private room and , after shutting your door , pray to your Father who is in secret ; then your Father who looks on in secret will repay you . ” ​ — Matthew 6 : 5 , 6 . 
 Of course , Jesus was not condemning public prayer , for he himself prayed publicly on certain occasions . 
 Jehovah deeply appreciates it when we pray to him from a sincere heart , with no thought of impressing others . 
 Our private prayers , in fact , are a good indicator of the depth of our love for God and our trust in him . 
 Hence , it comes as no surprise that Jesus often sought out private places to pray . 
 Once , he did this “ early in the morning , while it was still dark . ” 
 At another time , “ he went up into the mountain by himself to pray . ” 
 And before choosing his 12 apostles , Jesus spent the whole night alone in prayer . ​ — Mark 1 : 35 ; Matthew 14 : 23 ; Luke 6 : 12 , 13 . 
 When our prayers reflect sincerity and depth of feeling , of what may we be certain ? 
 Imagine how closely Jehovah must have listened to his Son’s heartfelt expressions ! 
 Indeed , Jesus at times prayed “ with strong outcries and tears , and he was favorably heard for his godly fear . ” 
 When our prayers reflect such sincerity and depth of feeling , we may be certain that our heavenly Father listens closely and appreciatively . 
 Yes , “ Jehovah is near to all those . . . who call upon him in trueness . ” ​ — Psalm 145 : 18 . 
 How does Jehovah feel about what we do in private ? 
 If Jehovah appreciates it when we pray to him in secret , how he must appreciate it when we obey him in secret ! 
 Yes , Jehovah is aware of what we do in private . 
 Indeed , our being faithful and obedient when we are alone is a good indication that we have “ a complete heart ” toward Jehovah , one that is pure in motive and that is firm for what is right . 
 How such conduct makes Jehovah’s heart rejoice ! ​ — Proverbs 27 : 11 ; 1 John 3 : 22 . 
 12 , 13 . 
 How can we guard our mind and heart and be like the faithful disciple Nathanael ? 
 Consequently , faithful Christians guard against secret sins that corrupt the mind and heart , such as the viewing of pornography and violence . 
 While some sins can be hidden from humans , we realize that “ all things are naked and openly exposed to the eyes of him with whom we have an accounting . ” 
 By striving to avoid things that displease Jehovah , we hold a clean conscience and delight in knowing that we have God’s approval . 
 Yes , there is no doubt that Jehovah truly appreciates the person “ who is walking faultlessly and practicing righteousness and speaking the truth in his heart . ” ​ — Psalm 15 : 1 , 2 . 
 How , though , can we guard our mind and heart in a world that is saturated with badness ? 
 In addition to taking full advantage of all spiritual provisions , we must make every effort to reject what is bad and do what is good , acting quickly so that improper desires do not become fertile and give birth to sin . 
 Think how happy you would be if Jesus said of you what he said of Nathanael : “ See , [ a man ] in whom there is no deceit . ” 
 Nathanael , also called Bartholomew , was later privileged to become one of Jesus ’ 12 apostles . ​ — Mark 3 : 16 - 19 . 
 “ A Merciful and Faithful High Priest ” 
 How did Jesus ’ response to Mary’s gesture compare with that of others ? 
 Being “ the image of the invisible God , ” Jehovah , Jesus always perfectly imitates his Father in showing appreciation for those who serve God out of a clean heart . 
 For example , five days before surrendering his life , Jesus and some of his disciples were guests in the home of Simon of Bethany . 
 During the evening , Mary , the sister of Lazarus and Martha , “ took a pound of perfumed oil , genuine nard , very costly ” ( worth about a year’s wages ) , and poured it onto Jesus ’ head and feet . 
 “ Why this waste ? ” 
 said some . 
 Jesus , however , saw Mary’s gesture in a very different light . 
 He viewed it as an act of great generosity and of deep significance in view of his imminent death and burial . 
 Hence , rather than criticize Mary , Jesus honored her . 
 “ Wherever this good news is preached in all the world , ” he said , “ what this woman did shall also be told as a remembrance of her . ” ​ — Matthew 26 : 6 - 13 . 
 15 , 16 . 
 How do we benefit by Jesus ’ having lived and served God as a human ? 
 How privileged we are to have such an appreciative person as Jesus as our Leader ! 
 In fact , Jesus ’ life as a human prepared him for the work Jehovah had in store for him ​ — serving as High Priest and King , first of the congregation of anointed ones and then of the world . ​ — Colossians 1 : 13 ; Hebrews 7 : 26 ; Revelation 11 : 15 . 
 Before coming to earth , Jesus already had a deep interest in and a special fondness for mankind . 
 By living as a human , he came to appreciate more fully the trials we experience in our service to God . 
 “ [ Jesus ] was obliged to become like his ‘ brothers ’ in all respects , ” wrote the apostle Paul , “ that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest . . . 
 For in that he himself has suffered when being put to the test , he is able to come to the aid of those who are being put to the test . ” 
 Jesus can “ sympathize with our weaknesses ” because he “ has been tested in all respects like ourselves , but without sin . ” ​ — Hebrews 2 : 17 , 18 ; 4 : 15 , 16 . 
 17 , 18 . ( a ) What do the letters to the seven congregations in Asia Minor reveal about Jesus ’ depth of appreciation ? 
 ( b ) For what were those anointed Christians being prepared ? 
 The heightened appreciation Jesus had for his followers ’ trials became evident after he was resurrected . 
 Consider his letters to the seven congregations in Asia Minor , as penned by the apostle John . 
 To the congregation in Smyrna , Jesus said : “ I know your tribulation and poverty . ” 
 Here , Jesus was saying , in effect , ‘ I fully understand your problems ; I really know what you are going through . ’ 
 Then , with both the compassion and the authority borne of his own suffering to the very death , Jesus added : “ Prove yourself faithful even to death , and I will give you the crown of life . ” ​ — Revelation 2 : 8 - 10 . 
 The letters to the seven congregations are filled with expressions that reflect Jesus ’ full awareness of his disciples ’ challenges and his genuine appreciation for their life of integrity . 
 Keep in mind that those whom Jesus addressed were anointed Christians with the hope of ruling alongside him in heaven . 
 In the footsteps of their Lord , they were being prepared for their lofty role of helping to administer with the greatest compassion the benefits of Christ’s ransom sacrifice to ailing humankind . ​ — Revelation 5 : 9 , 10 ; 22 : 1 - 5 . 
 19 , 20 . 
 How do those making up the “ great crowd ” show their appreciation to Jehovah and his Son ? 
 Of course , Jesus ’ love for his anointed followers is also extended toward his loyal “ other sheep , ” millions of whom now make up the prospective “ great crowd . . . out of all nations , ” who will survive the coming “ great tribulation . ” 
 These ones are flocking to Jesus ’ side out of appreciation for his ransom sacrifice and for their hope of everlasting life . 
 How do they show their appreciation ? 
 They do so by “ rendering [ God ] sacred service day and night . ” ​ — Revelation 7 : 15 - 17 . 
 The worldwide report for the 2006 service year , set out on pages 27 to 30 , gives clear evidence that these faithful ministers are truly rendering Jehovah “ sacred service day and night . ” 
 In fact , during that one year , they along with the relatively small remaining body of anointed Christians devoted a total of 1,333,966,199 hours to the public ministry ​ — equivalent to well over 150,000 years ! 
 Continue to Show Appreciation ! 
 21 , 22 . ( a ) In regard to showing appreciation , why must Christians be especially on guard today ? 
 ( b ) What will be considered in the following article ? 
 In dealing with imperfect humans , Jehovah and his Son have shown a depth of appreciation that is truly overwhelming . 
 Sadly , though , the majority of humans give little thought to God , focusing instead on their own concerns . 
 Describing people living in “ the last days , ” Paul wrote : “ Men will become utterly self - centred , greedy for money . . . 
 They will be utterly lacking in gratitude . ” 
 What a contrast such ones are to true Christians , who by means of heartfelt prayer , willing obedience , and whole - souled service demonstrate their appreciation for all that God has done for them ! ​ — Psalm 62 : 8 ; Mark 12 : 30 ; 1 John 5 : 3 . 
 In the following article , we will review some of the many spiritual provisions that Jehovah has lovingly extended to us . 
 As we reflect on these ‘ good gifts , ’ may our appreciation grow even deeper . ​ — James 1 : 17 . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • How has Jehovah shown himself to be an appreciative God ? 
 • When in private , how can we make Jehovah’s heart rejoice ? 
 • In what ways did Jesus show appreciation ? 
 • How did living as a human help Jesus to be a compassionate and appreciative ruler ? 
 [ Picture on page 17 ] 
 As a parent loves her child’s simple expression , Jehovah appreciates it when we give him our best 
 Never Cease Growing in Your Appreciation 
 “ How precious your thoughts are ! 
 O God , how much does the grand sum of them amount to ! ” ​ — PSALM 139 : 17 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 Why should we appreciate God’s Word , and how did the psalmist voice his appreciation ? 
 IT WAS a sensational find . 
 While repairs were being made on Jehovah’s temple in Jerusalem , High Priest Hilkiah found “ the book of Jehovah’s law by the hand of Moses , ” doubtless the original copy completed some 800 years earlier ! 
 Can you imagine how God - fearing King Josiah must have felt when that book was placed before him ? 
 Indeed , he prized it and immediately had Shaphan , the secretary , read it aloud . ​ — 2 Chronicles 34 : 14 - 18 . 
 Today , God’s Word , in whole or in part , can be read by billions . 
 But does that make the Scriptures less valuable , less important ? 
 Of course not ! 
 After all , they contain the very thoughts of the Almighty , recorded for our benefit . 
 Expressing his feelings about God’s Word , the psalmist David wrote : “ To me how precious your thoughts are ! 
 O God , how much does the grand sum of them amount to ! ” ​ — Psalm 139 : 17 . 
 What shows that David was a man of spiritual depth ? 
 David’s appreciation for Jehovah , his Word , and his arrangement for true worship never faded . 
 The many beautiful psalms David composed expressed how he felt . 
 For example , at Psalm 27 : 4 , he wrote : “ One thing I have asked from Jehovah ​ — it is what I shall look for , that I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life , to behold the pleasantness of Jehovah and to look with appreciation upon his temple . ” 
 In the original Hebrew , the expression “ to look with appreciation ” means to linger in contemplation , to scrutinize , to see with pleasure , delight , admiration . 
 Clearly , David was a man of spiritual depth who truly appreciated Jehovah’s spiritual provisions and relished every morsel of spiritual truth that God revealed . 
 His example of appreciation is worthy of imitation . ​ — Psalm 19 : 7 - 11 . 
 Appreciate the Privilege of Knowing Bible Truth 
 What caused Jesus to become “ overjoyed in the holy spirit ” ? 
 Gaining insight into God’s Word does not depend on intellect or worldly education , which tend to foster pride . 
 Instead , it depends on Jehovah’s undeserved kindness , which he extends toward humble , honesthearted people who are conscious of their spiritual need . 
 When Jesus reflected on the fact that some imperfect humans were having their names inscribed in heaven , “ he became overjoyed in the holy spirit and said : ‘ I publicly praise you , Father , Lord of heaven and earth , because you have carefully hidden these things from wise and intellectual ones , and have revealed them to babes . ’ ” ​ — Luke 10 : 17 - 21 . 
 Why were Jesus ’ disciples not to take for granted the Kingdom truths revealed to them ? 
 After uttering that heartfelt prayer , Jesus turned to his disciples and said : “ Happy are the eyes that behold the things you are beholding . 
 For I say to you , Many prophets and kings desired to see the things you are beholding but did not see them , and to hear the things you are hearing but did not hear them . ” 
 Yes , Jesus encouraged his faithful followers not to take for granted the precious Kingdom truths being revealed to them . 
 These truths had not been revealed to earlier generations of God’s servants , and they were certainly not disclosed to the “ wise and intellectual ones ” of Jesus ’ day ! ​ — Luke 10 : 23 , 24 . 
 6 , 7 . ( a ) What reasons do we have for being appreciative of divine truth ? 
 ( b ) What contrast is seen today between true religion and false ? 
 In our day , we have even more reasons for being appreciative of divine truth , for Jehovah , by means of “ the faithful and discreet slave , ” has given his people still deeper insight into his Word . 
 Concerning the time of the end , the prophet Daniel wrote : “ Many will rove about , and the true knowledge will become abundant . ” 
 Do you not agree that today the knowledge of God has “ become abundant ” and that Jehovah’s servants are well - fed spiritually ? 
 What a contrast we see between the spiritual prosperity of God’s people and the religious confusion of Babylon the Great ! 
 As a result , many who are disillusioned or disgusted with false religion are turning to true worship . 
 They are sheeplike ones who “ do not want to share with [ Babylon the Great ] in her sins ” or “ receive part of her plagues . ” 
 Jehovah and his servants invite all such ones into the true Christian congregation . ​ — Revelation 18 : 2 - 4 ; 22 : 17 . 
 Appreciative Ones Flock to God 
 8 , 9 . 
 How are the words of Haggai 2 : 7 being fulfilled today ? 
 Concerning his spiritual house of worship , Jehovah foretold : “ I will rock all the nations , and the desirable things of all the nations must come in ; and I will fill this house with glory . ” 
 This amazing prophecy had a fulfillment in the time of Haggai when a restored remnant of God’s people rebuilt the temple in Jerusalem . 
 Today , Haggai’s words are having further fulfillment in regard to Jehovah’s great spiritual temple . 
 Millions have already flocked to the figurative temple in order to worship God “ with spirit and truth , ” and every year hundreds of thousands of “ desirable things of all the nations ” continue to stream in . 
 For example , the worldwide report for the 2006 service year shows that 248,327 were baptized in symbol of their dedication to Jehovah . 
 That represents an average of 680 new ones every day ! 
 Their love of the truth and their desire to serve Jehovah as Kingdom proclaimers give evidence that they truly were drawn by God . ​ — John 6 : 44 , 65 . 
 10 , 11 . 
 Relate an experience that shows how people have come to appreciate Bible truth . 
 Many of these honesthearted ones were attracted to the truth because they discerned “ the distinction between a righteous one and a wicked one , between one serving God and one who has not served him . ” 
 Consider the experience of Wayne and Virginia , a married couple who belonged to a Protestant church but who had many unanswered questions . 
 They hated war and were confused and disturbed when they saw the clergy blessing soldiers and weapons . 
 As the couple grew older , they felt ignored by others in the church , even though Virginia had taught Sunday school for a number of years . 
 “ No one called on us or expressed interest in our spiritual welfare , ” they said . 
 “ All that the church wanted was our money . 
 We felt lost . ” 
 They became even more disillusioned when their church adopted a permissive stance on homosexuality . 
 In the meantime , Wayne and Virginia’s granddaughter and then their daughter became Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 Though Wayne and Virginia were upset about this at first , they later changed their mind and accepted a Bible study . 
 “ In just three months , ” said Wayne , “ we learned more about the Bible than we had learned over the previous 70 years ! 
 We never knew that God’s name is Jehovah , and we knew nothing about the Kingdom and the Paradise earth . ” 
 Before long , this sincere couple began to attend Christian meetings and to share in the ministry . 
 “ We want to tell everyone about the truth , ” said Virginia . 
 Both in their 80 ’ s , they were baptized in 2005 . 
 “ We have found a true Christian home , ” they said . 
 Appreciate Being “ Equipped for Every Good Work ” 
 What does Jehovah always provide for his servants , and what must we do to benefit ? 
 Jehovah always helps his servants to do his will . 
 Noah , for example , received clear , specific instructions on how to build the ark ​ — a project that had to be just right the first time ! 
 And it was . 
 Why ? 
 Because Noah “ proceeded to do according to all that God had commanded him . 
 He did just so . ” 
 Today , too , Jehovah fully equips his servants to do his will . 
 Of course , our primary work is to preach the good news of God’s established Kingdom and help deserving ones become disciples of Jesus Christ . 
 And as was true of Noah , our success depends on obedience . 
 We must obediently follow the direction Jehovah provides through his Word and his organization . ​ — Matthew 24 : 14 ; 28 : 19 , 20 . 
 By what means does Jehovah provide us with training ? 
 In order to accomplish that work , we must learn to ‘ handle aright ’ our main tool ​ — God’s Word — ​ which is “ beneficial for teaching , for reproving , for setting things straight , for disciplining in righteousness , that the man of God may be fully competent , completely equipped for every good work . ” 
 As in the first century , Jehovah gives us valuable training through the Christian congregation . 
 Today , in the 99,770 congregations worldwide , the Theocratic Ministry School and Service Meeting are held weekly to help us in the ministry . 
 Do you show your appreciation for these important meetings by regularly attending and by applying the things you learn ? ​ — Hebrews 10 : 24 , 25 . 
 How do Jehovah’s servants demonstrate their appreciation for the privilege of serving God ? 
 ( Include comments on the chart on pages 27 - 30 . ) 
 Exerting themselves in the ministry , millions of God’s people around the world are demonstrating their appreciation for the training they receive . 
 For example , during the 2006 service year , 6,741,444 Kingdom publishers spent a total of 1,333,966,199 hours in all facets of the work , which included the conducting of 6,286,618 home Bible studies . 
 These are just some of the encouraging details listed in the worldwide report . 
 We invite you to take a close look at this report and draw encouragement from it , just as our first - century brothers no doubt drew much encouragement from reports about the expansion of the preaching work in their time . ​ — Acts 1 : 15 ; 2 : 5 - 11 , 41 , 47 ; 4 : 4 ; 6 : 7 . 
 Why should no one feel discouraged about his whole - souled service to Jehovah ? 
 The tremendous shout of praise that ascends to God each year reflects the deep appreciation that Jehovah’s servants have for the privilege of knowing Jehovah and bearing witness to him . 
 True , the sacrifice of praise that some of our aged , sick , or infirm brothers and sisters offer can be compared to the widow’s mite . 
 But let us not forget that Jehovah and his Son truly appreciate all who serve God whole - souled , as they do all that they are able to do . ​ — Luke 21 : 1 - 4 ; Galatians 6 : 4 . 
 What teaching tools has God provided in recent times ? 
 Besides training us for the ministry , Jehovah , through his organization , equips us with excellent teaching tools . 
 In recent decades , these have included the books The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life , You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth , Knowledge That Leads to Everlasting Life and , currently , What Does the Bible Really Teach ? 
 Those who truly appreciate these provisions make good use of them in the ministry . 
 Make Good Use of the Bible Teach Book 
 17 , 18 . ( a ) Which parts of the Bible Teach book do you like to highlight in your ministry ? 
 ( b ) What did one circuit overseer observe about the Bible Teach book ? 
 With its 19 chapters , in - depth appendix , and clear , simple language , the book What Does the Bible Really Teach ? 
 is proving to be a boon to the ministry . 
 For example , chapter 12 discusses the subject “ Living in a Way That Pleases God . ” 
 This material explains to the student how he can become a friend of God , something that many have never even considered or thought possible . 
 How is this Bible study aid being received ? 
 A circuit overseer in Australia reports that the Bible Teach book has an “ instant appeal that quickly draws householders into a conversation . ” 
 He adds that the book is so easy to use that it “ has given many Kingdom publishers renewed confidence and joy in the ministry . 
 No wonder some are calling the book the Gold Nugget ! ” 
 19 - 21 . 
 Relate some experiences that highlight the value of the Bible Teach book . 
 “ God must have sent you , ” said a woman in Guyana to the pioneer at her door . 
 The woman’s partner had recently left her and their two small children . 
 The pioneer opened the Bible Teach book to chapter 1 and read aloud paragraph 11 , under the subhead “ How Does God Feel About Injustices We Face ? ” 
 “ The points touched her deeply , ” said the pioneer . 
 “ In fact , she had to get up , go to the back of her shop , and have a good cry . ” 
 This woman accepted the offer of a regular Bible study with a local sister and is continuing to make progress . 
 José , who lives in Spain , lost his wife in a traffic accident . 
 He sought solace in drugs , and he also obtained professional help . 
 However , the psychologists could not answer the question that disturbed José most : “ Why did God allow my wife to die ? ” 
 One day José met Francesc , who worked for the same company . 
 Francesc suggested that they discuss chapter 11 of the Bible Teach book , entitled “ Why Does God Allow Suffering ? ” 
 The Scriptural explanation and the illustration of a teacher and a pupil deeply impressed José . 
 He began to study in earnest , attended a circuit assembly , and now attends meetings at the local Kingdom Hall . 
 Roman , a 40 - year - old businessman in Poland , has always had respect for the Word of God . 
 But because he was very involved in his work , he progressed only to a certain point in his Bible study . 
 Nevertheless , he attended a district convention and received a copy of the Bible Teach book . 
 Thereafter , he made marked improvement . 
 “ With this book , ” he says , “ all the basic teachings of the Bible seem to come together to form a complete picture , like a jigsaw puzzle . ” 
 Roman now studies the Bible regularly and is making fine progress . 
 Continue to Grow in Appreciation 
 22 , 23 . 
 How can we continue to show our appreciation for the hope that is set before us ? 
 As explained at the thrilling “ Deliverance at Hand ! ” 
 District Conventions , true Christians yearn for the “ everlasting deliverance ” promised by God and made possible by the shed blood of Jesus Christ . 
 There is no better way to show our heartfelt appreciation for this precious hope than by continuing to be cleansed “ from dead works that we may render sacred service to the living God . ” ​ — Hebrews 9 : 12 , 14 . 
 Yes , that over six million Kingdom proclaimers faithfully endure in God’s service when the pressure to serve self is at an all - time high is truly a miracle . 
 It is also proof that Jehovah’s servants deeply appreciate the honor of serving God , knowing that their “ labor is not in vain in connection with the Lord . ” 
 May that appreciation never cease to grow ! ​ — 1 Corinthians 15 : 58 ; Psalm 110 : 3 . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • What does the psalmist teach us about appreciation for God and his spiritual provisions ? 
 • How are the words at Haggai 2 : 7 being fulfilled today ? 
 • How has Jehovah equipped his servants to serve him effectively ? 
 • What can you do to show your appreciation for Jehovah’s goodness ? 
 [ Chart on page 27 - 30 ] 
 2006 SERVICE YEAR REPORT OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES WORLDWIDE 
 ( See bound volume ) 
 [ Pictures on page 25 ] 
 Jehovah fully equips us to do his will 
 Husbands ​ — Recognize Christ’s Headship 
 “ The head of every man is the Christ . ” ​ — 1 CORINTHIANS 11 : 3 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) How might the success of a husband be measured ? 
 ( b ) Why is it vital to recognize that marriage is of divine origin ? 
 HOW would you measure the success of a husband ? 
 By his mental or physical abilities ? 
 By his ability to make money ? 
 Or is it especially by the loving and kind way he treats his wife and children ? 
 As to the latter measurement , many husbands rate poorly , for they are governed by the spirit of the world and by human standards . 
 Why ? 
 Largely because of their failure to recognize and apply the guidance of the Originator of marriage ​ — the One who “ proceeded to build the rib that he had taken from the man into a woman and to bring her to the man . ” ​ — Genesis 2 : 21 - 24 . 
 Jesus Christ confirmed this Bible account of the divine origin of marriage , saying to critics of his day : “ Did you not read that he who created them from the beginning made them male and female and said , ‘ For this reason a man will leave his father and his mother and will stick to his wife , and the two will be one flesh ’ ? 
 So that they are no longer two , but one flesh . 
 Therefore , what God has yoked together [ in marriage ] let no man put apart . ” 
 The fact is that the key to realizing a successful marriage is to recognize that marriage is of divine origin and that success is dependent on applying the instruction found in God’s Word , the Bible . 
 A Key to a Husband’s Success 
 3 , 4 . ( a ) What makes Jesus knowledgeable about marriage ? 
 ( b ) Who is Jesus ’ figurative wife , and how should husbands treat their wives ? 
 An aid to success as a husband is studying what Jesus said and applying what He did . 
 His knowledge on the subject is profound , for he was present at the creation of the first human pair as well as at their marriage . 
 Jehovah God said to him : “ Let us make man in our image , according to our likeness . ” 
 Yes , God was speaking to the One whom He created before anyone or anything else and who “ came to be beside him as a master worker . ” 
 This One is “ the firstborn of all creation . ” 
 He is “ the beginning of the creation by God , ” existing even before the creation of the material universe . ​ — Colossians 1 : 15 ; Revelation 3 : 14 . 
 Jesus is called “ the Lamb of God , ” and he is figuratively depicted as a husband . 
 An angel once said : “ Come here , I will show you the bride , the Lamb’s wife . ” 
 Who , then , is that bride , or wife ? 
 “ The Lamb’s wife ” is made up of Christ’s faithful spirit - anointed followers , who will share with him in his heavenly rulership . 
 Therefore , the way that Jesus treated his disciples when he was with them on earth provides a model for husbands as to how to treat their wives . 
 For whom does Jesus serve as a model ? 
 True , Jesus is presented in the Bible as an example for all his followers , as we read : “ Christ suffered for you , leaving you a model for you to follow his steps closely . ” 
 Yet , he is , in particular , a model for men . 
 The Bible says : “ The head of every man is the Christ ; in turn the head of a woman is the man ; in turn the head of the Christ is God . ” 
 Since Christ is man’s head , husbands need to copy his example . 
 Hence , the headship principle must be applied if the family is to find success and happiness . 
 To this end , husbands need to deal with their wives in the loving way that Jesus deals with his figurative wife , his anointed disciples . 
 How to Face Marital Challenges 
 How should husbands dwell with their wives ? 
 In today’s troubled world , husbands especially need to imitate Jesus ’ example of patience , love , and firmness in upholding righteous principles . 
 With regard to the model Jesus left , we read in the Bible : “ You husbands , continue dwelling in like manner with [ your wives ] according to knowledge . ” 
 Yes , husbands need to face marital challenges in a knowledgeable manner , just as Jesus faced difficulties . 
 He suffered greater trials than has any other human , but he was aware that Satan , his demons , and this evil world were responsible for them . 
 Jesus was never surprised by trials , so neither should marriage mates be surprised when they experience “ tribulation in their flesh . ” 
 The Bible warns that those who marry can expect to have such tribulation . ​ — 1 Corinthians 7 : 28 . 
 7 , 8 . ( a ) What is involved in dwelling with wives according to knowledge ? 
 ( b ) Why do wives deserve to receive honor ? 
 Husbands , the Bible says , should dwell with their wives “ according to knowledge , assigning them honor as to a weaker vessel , the feminine one . ” 
 Rather than harshly dominating his wife , as the Bible foretold that men would commonly do , a husband who wins God’s approval will honor her . 
 He will want to treat her as a prized possession , never using his greater physical strength to hurt her . 
 Instead , he will consider her feelings , always treating her with respect and dignity . 
 Why should husbands properly assign honor to their wives ? 
 The Bible answers : “ Since you are also heirs with them of the undeserved favor of life , in order for your prayers not to be hindered . ” 
 Husbands need to appreciate that Jehovah does not look at a man who worships Him as in any way superior to a woman who does so . 
 Women who are counted worthy of God’s approval will share with men the same reward of everlasting life ​ — many even enjoying life in heaven , where “ there is neither male nor female . ” 
 So husbands need to remember that it is a person’s faithfulness that makes him precious to God . 
 It is not whether a person is a male or a female , a husband or a wife , or even a child . ​ — 1 Corinthians 4 : 2 . 
 ( a ) According to Peter , for what reason should husbands honor their wives ? 
 ( b ) How did Jesus show honor to women ? 
 The necessity of a husband’s treating his wife with honor is emphasized by the apostle Peter’s concluding words , “ in order for your prayers not to be hindered . ” 
 How dangerous such a hindrance could be ! 
 It could even lead to a husband’s prayers being blocked , as happened to some neglectful servants of God in the past . 
 Wisely , Christian men ​ — both married and those considering marriage — ​ will study the dignified way in which Jesus treated women . 
 He welcomed them into the group accompanying him in his ministry , and he treated them with kindness and respect . 
 On one occasion , Jesus even revealed a most startling truth to women first , telling them to inform the men about it ! ​ — Matthew 28 : 1 , 8 - 10 ; Luke 8 : 1 - 3 . 
 Example Especially for Husbands 
 10 , 11 . ( a ) Why do husbands especially need to study Jesus ’ example ? 
 ( b ) How should husbands show love for their wives ? 
 The Bible , as noted earlier , compares a husband’s relationship with his wife to that of Christ with his “ bride , ” which is his congregation of anointed followers . 
 The Bible says : “ A husband is head of his wife as the Christ also is head of the congregation . ” 
 These words should encourage husbands to examine the type of headship , or leadership , that Jesus provided for his followers . 
 Only by making this examination will husbands be properly able to follow Jesus ’ example and provide for their wives direction , love , and care , as Jesus did for his congregation . 
 “ Husbands , continue loving your wives , ” the Bible urges Christians , “ just as the Christ also loved the congregation and delivered up himself for it . ” 
 In the preceding chapter of Ephesians , “ the congregation ” is called “ the body of the Christ . ” 
 This symbolic body has many members of both genders , all of whom contribute to the body’s functioning effectively . 
 Jesus , of course , is “ the head of the body , the congregation . ” ​ — Ephesians 4 : 12 ; Colossians 1 : 18 ; 1 Corinthians 12 : 12 , 13 , 27 . 
 How did Jesus demonstrate love for his figurative body ? 
 Jesus demonstrated love for his figurative body , “ the congregation , ” particularly by the caring manner in which he served the interests of those who would become its members . 
 When his disciples were tired , for example , he said : “ Come . . . privately into a lonely place and rest up a bit . ” 
 Describing Jesus ’ activity only hours before his execution , one of his apostles wrote : “ Jesus , having loved his own [ that is , members of his figurative body ] . . . , loved them to the end . ” 
 What a fine example Jesus provided of how husbands are to treat their wives ! 
 How are husbands admonished to love their wives ? 
 Continuing to draw upon the example that Jesus set for husbands , the apostle Paul admonished them : “ Husbands ought to be loving their wives as their own bodies . 
 He who loves his wife loves himself , for no man ever hated his own flesh ; but he feeds and cherishes it , as the Christ also does the congregation . ” 
 Paul added : “ Let each one of you individually so love his wife as he does himself . ” ​ — Ephesians 5 : 28 , 29 , 33 . 
 How does a husband treat his imperfect physical body , and what does this indicate about how he should treat his wife ? 
 Think about Paul’s words . 
 Does a sane man ever intentionally injure his own body ? 
 When a man stubs his toe , does he beat it because it made him stumble ? 
 Of course not ! 
 Does a husband humiliate himself before his friends or gossip about his own shortcomings ? 
 No ! 
 Why , then , would he give his wife a tongue - lashing , or worse , if she made a mistake ? 
 Husbands should consider not just their own interests but those of their wives . ​ — 1 Corinthians 10 : 24 ; 13 : 5 . 
 ( a ) What did Jesus do when his disciples demonstrated human weakness ? 
 ( b ) What lessons might be drawn from his example ? 
 Consider how Jesus manifested concern for his disciples on the night before his death , when they showed human weakness . 
 Despite his repeated request that they pray , they fell asleep three times in the garden of Gethsemane . 
 Suddenly , armed men surrounded them . 
 Jesus asked the men : “ Whom are you looking for ? ” 
 When they replied : “ Jesus the Nazarene , ” he answered : “ I am he . ” 
 Knowing that ‘ the hour had come ’ for his death , he said : “ If , therefore , it is I you are looking for , let these go . ” 
 Jesus never failed to consider the welfare of his disciples ​ — part of his figurative bride — ​ and he made a way out for them . 
 By studying how Jesus treated his disciples , husbands will find many principles that they can apply as to how they should treat their wives . ​ — John 18 : 1 - 9 ; Mark 14 : 34 - 37 , 41 . 
 Jesus ’ Love Not Sentimental 
 How did Jesus feel about Martha , yet how did he correct her ? 
 The Bible says : “ Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus , ” who often received him as a guest in their home . 
 Yet , Jesus did not hold back from counseling Martha when she gave undue attention to a meal that she was preparing , thus limiting her time to receive spiritual instruction from him . 
 He said : “ Martha , Martha , you are anxious and disturbed about many things . 
 A few things , though , are needed , or just one . ” 
 No doubt his evident affection for Martha made it easy for her to accept his counsel . 
 Similarly , husbands should treat their wives in a kind , loving manner , using well - chosen words . 
 Yet , when correction is needed , it is appropriate to speak up as did Jesus . 
 17 , 18 . ( a ) How did Peter rebuke Jesus , and why did Peter need to be corrected ? 
 ( b ) What responsibility does a husband have ? 
 On another occasion , Jesus explained to his apostles that he must go to Jerusalem , where he would be persecuted by “ the older men and chief priests and scribes , and be killed , and on the third day be raised up . ” 
 At this Peter took Jesus aside and began to rebuke him , saying : “ Be kind to yourself , Lord ; you will not have this destiny at all . ” 
 Clearly , Peter’s view had been blurred by sentimentality . 
 Correction was in order . 
 So Jesus said to him : “ Get behind me , Satan ! 
 You are a stumbling block to me , because you think , not God’s thoughts , but those of men . ” ​ — Matthew 16 : 21 - 23 . 
 Jesus had just stated the divine will ​ — namely , that he would suffer many things and be killed . 
 So Peter was wrong to begin rebuking Jesus . 
 Yes , Peter needed firm correction , as we all do at times . 
 As the family head , the husband has the authority and responsibility to correct family members , including his wife . 
 While firmness may be needed , this correction should be given in a kind , loving manner . 
 So just as Jesus helped Peter to put matters in proper perspective , husbands at times may need to do the same for their wives . 
 For example , a husband may need to point out in a kind manner why some adjustment is needed if her dress or use of jewelry or cosmetics begins to stray from the modest pattern recommended in the Scriptures . ​ — 1 Peter 3 : 3 - 5 . 
 Good for Husbands to Be Patient 
 19 , 20 . ( a ) What problem developed among Jesus ’ apostles , and how did Jesus address it ? 
 ( b ) How successful were Jesus ’ efforts ? 
 If there is a fault that needs attention , husbands should not necessarily expect that their sincere efforts to correct it will meet with immediate success . 
 It took ongoing efforts by Jesus to adjust the attitudes of his apostles . 
 For example , a rivalry developed among them that manifested itself again toward the end of Jesus ’ ministry . 
 They argued about who among them seemed to be the greatest . 
 Not long after the second of such occasions , Jesus arranged to celebrate privately his last Passover with them . 
 On that occasion , not one of them took the initiative to do the customary menial service of washing the dusty feet of the others . 
 Jesus did it . 
 Then he said : “ I set the pattern for you . ” ​ — John 13 : 2 - 15 . 
 Husbands who exercise a humble attitude like that of Jesus will likely have the cooperation and support of their wives . 
 But patience is needed . 
 Later that very Passover night , the apostles argued again regarding which one of them seemed to be the greatest . 
 Changes in attitudes and conduct often take time and are gradual . 
 Yet , how rewarding when positive results are realized , as they were among the apostles ! 
 In the face of challenges today , what are husbands urged to remember and to do ? 
 Today , marriage is facing greater challenges than ever before . 
 Many no longer take their marriage vows seriously . 
 Hence , husbands , reflect on the origin of marriage . 
 Remember that marriage is of divine origin , conceived and instituted by our loving God , Jehovah . 
 He provided his Son , Jesus , not only as our Ransomer ​ — our Savior — ​ but also as a model for husbands to imitate . ​ — Matthew 20 : 28 ; John 3 : 29 ; 1 Peter 2 : 21 . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • Why is it important that we recognize the origin of marriage ? 
 • In what ways are husbands encouraged to love their wives ? 
 • What examples of Jesus ’ treatment of his disciples illustrate how a husband should exercise Christlike headship ? 
 [ Picture on page 14 ] 
 Why should husbands study examples of how Jesus treated women ? 
 [ Picture on page 15 ] 
 When his disciples were tired , Jesus showed consideration 
 [ Picture on page 16 ] 
 Husbands should counsel their wives with kind , well - chosen words 
 Wives ​ — Deeply Respect Your Husbands 
 “ Wives be in subjection to [ your ] husbands . ” ​ — EPHESIANS 5 : 22 . 
 Why is respecting a husband often hard to do ? 
 IN MANY lands when a couple gets married , the bride makes a vow , promising that she will deeply respect her husband . 
 However , the way that many husbands treat their wives has a bearing on whether that vow is difficult to live up to or not . 
 Yet , marriage had a wonderful beginning . 
 God took a rib from Adam , the first man , and made the woman . 
 Adam exclaimed : “ This is at last bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh . ” ​ — Genesis 2 : 19 - 23 . 
 What has developed regarding women and marriage in recent times ? 
 Despite that fine beginning , a movement called women’s liberation ​ — an attempt by women to break free from male domination — ​ began in the early 1960 ’ s in the United States . 
 At that time , some 300 husbands abandoned their families to every 1 wife who did . 
 By the end of the 1960 ’ s , the ratio changed to about 100 to 1 . 
 Now , it seems , women swear , drink , smoke , and behave immorally as much as men do . 
 So are women happier ? 
 No . 
 In some countries , about half of the people who marry eventually divorce . 
 Has the effort by some women to improve their marital situation made matters better or worse ? ​ — 2 Timothy 3 : 1 - 5 . 
 What is the basic problem affecting marriage ? 
 What is the basic problem ? 
 To some extent , it is the problem that has existed since Eve was seduced by the rebel angel , “ the original serpent , the one called Devil and Satan . ” 
 Satan has undermined what God teaches . 
 For example , regarding marriage , the Devil has made it appear restrictive and harsh . 
 The propaganda he promotes through the media of this world ​ — of which he is the ruler — ​ is designed to make God’s instructions seem unfair and out - of - date . 
 If , though , we examine with an open mind what God says regarding a woman’s role in marriage , we will see how wise and practical God’s Word is . 
 Caution to Those Who Marry 
 4 , 5 . ( a ) Why is caution advisable when considering marriage ? 
 ( b ) What should a woman do before consenting to marry ? 
 The Bible provides a word of warning . 
 It says that in this Devil - ruled world , even those in successful marriages will have “ tribulation . ” 
 So although marriage is a divine arrangement , the Bible cautions those who enter into it . 
 One inspired Bible writer said regarding a woman whose husband has died and who therefore is free to remarry : “ She is happier if she remains as she is . ” 
 Jesus also recommended singleness for those who “ can make room for it . ” 
 However , if anyone chooses to marry , it should be to one “ in the Lord , ” that is , to a dedicated and baptized worshipper of God . ​ — 1 Corinthians 7 : 28 , 36 - 40 ; Matthew 19 : 10 - 12 . 
 The reason that a woman in particular should give attention to whom she marries is the Bible’s caution : “ A married woman is bound by law to her husband . ” 
 Only if he dies or commits immorality and the couple is divorced because of it is she “ free from his law . ” 
 The love - at - first - sight feeling may be enough for a pleasurable romance , but it is not an adequate basis for a happy marriage . 
 A single woman , therefore , needs to ask herself , ‘ Am I willing to enter into an arrangement in which I will come under the law of this man ? ’ 
 The time to consider this question is before getting married , not afterward . 
 What decision can most women today make , and why is it so important ? 
 In many places today , a woman can choose either to accept or to reject a marriage proposal . 
 Yet , making a wise choice may be the hardest thing a woman ever does , since her desire for the closeness and love possible in marriage can be very strong . 
 One writer noted : “ The more we want to do something ​ — whether it is to marry or scale a particular mountain — ​ the more likely we are to make unchecked assumptions and pay attention only to the data that tells us what we want to hear . ” 
 An irrational decision for a mountain climber may cost him his life ; an unwise choice of a marriage mate can likewise be disastrous . 
 What wise counsel has been provided about seeking a mate ? 
 A woman should consider seriously what could be involved in being under the law of a man who proposes to her . 
 Years ago , a young Indian girl modestly acknowledged : “ Our parents are older and wiser , and they aren’t as easily deceived as we would be . . . . 
 I could so easily make a mistake . ” 
 The help that parents and others can provide is important . 
 One wise counselor long encouraged young people to get to know the parents of their prospective marriage mate as well as to observe carefully that one’s interaction with parents and other family members . 
 How Jesus Showed Subjection 
 8 , 9 . ( a ) How did Jesus view his subjection to God ? 
 ( b ) What benefit may be realized from subjection ? 
 Although subjection can be challenging , women can welcome it as honorable , even as did Jesus . 
 While his subjection to God involved suffering , including death on a torture stake , he found joy in being submissive to God . 
 Women can look to Jesus as an example , for the Bible says : “ The head of a woman is the man ; in turn the head of the Christ is God . ” 
 Significantly , however , it is not only when women marry that they come under the headship of men . 
 The Bible explains that women , whether married or single , should submit to the headship of spiritually qualified men who exercise oversight in the Christian congregation . 
 When women follow God’s direction to do so , they set an example for the angels in God’s organizational arrangement . 
 In addition , older married women , by their fine example and helpful suggestions , teach younger women to ‘ subject themselves to their own husbands . ’ ​ — Titus 2 : 3 - 5 . 
 How did Jesus set an example in showing subjection ? 
 Jesus realized the value of appropriate subjection . 
 On one occasion , he directed the apostle Peter to pay taxes to human authorities for them both , even providing Peter with the tax money to do so . 
 Peter later wrote : “ For the Lord’s sake subject yourselves to every human creation . ” 
 Regarding Jesus ’ most outstanding example of subjection , we read : “ He emptied himself and took a slave’s form and came to be in the likeness of men . 
 More than that , when he found himself in fashion as a man , he humbled himself and became obedient as far as death . ” ​ — Philippians 2 : 5 - 8 . 
 Why did Peter encourage wives to be submissive even to husbands who were unbelievers ? 
 When encouraging Christians to be submissive even to harsh , unjust authorities of this world , Peter explained : “ In fact , to this course you were called , because even Christ suffered for you , leaving you a model for you to follow his steps closely . ” 
 After describing how much Jesus suffered and how he submissively endured , Peter encouraged wives of unbelieving husbands : “ In like manner , you wives , be in subjection to your own husbands , in order that , if any are not obedient to the word , they may be won without a word through the conduct of their wives , because of having been eyewitnesses of your chaste conduct together with deep respect . ” ​ — 1 Peter 3 : 1 , 2 . 
 What benefits were realized by Jesus ’ submissive course ? 
 Submission in the face of ridicule and abuse may be viewed as evidence of weakness . 
 Yet , that is not how Jesus viewed it . 
 “ When he was being reviled , ” Peter wrote , “ he did not go reviling in return . 
 When he was suffering , he did not go threatening . ” 
 Some who watched Jesus suffer became believers , at least to some degree , including a robber on a stake next to him and the army officer viewing the execution . 
 Similarly , Peter indicated that some unbelieving husbands ​ — even those who are abusive — ​ will become Christians after observing the submissive conduct of their wives . 
 We have seen evidence of this happening today . 
 How Wives Can Win Favor 
 13 , 14 . 
 How has submission to unbelieving husbands been beneficial ? 
 Wives who have become believers have won over their husbands by their Christlike conduct . 
 At a recent district convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses , a husband said of his Christian wife : “ I guess I was a jerk in the way I treated her . 
 Yet , she was very respectful of me . 
 She never once put me down . 
 She didn’t try to force her beliefs on me . 
 She cared for me in a loving way . 
 When she went to an assembly , she worked hard to prepare my meals ahead of time and to get the housework done . 
 Her attitude started to arouse my interest in the Bible . 
 And , well , here I am ! ” 
 Yes , he had , in effect , been “ won without a word ” by his wife’s conduct . 
 As Peter emphasized , it is not so much what a wife says but what she does that produces positive results . 
 This was illustrated by a wife who learned Bible truths and was determined to attend Christian meetings . 
 “ Agnes , if you go out that door , don’t come back in ! ” 
 her husband shouted . 
 She did not go out “ that door ” but , rather , another one . 
 The next meeting night , he threatened : “ I won’t be here when you come back . ” 
 Well , he was not ​ — he was gone for three days . 
 When he returned , she kindly asked : “ Would you like something to eat ? ” 
 Agnes never budged in her devotion to Jehovah . 
 Her husband eventually accepted a Bible study , dedicated his life to God , and later served as an overseer with many responsibilities . 
 What “ adornment ” is recommended for Christian wives ? 
 The apostle Peter recommended something that the wives noted above have demonstrated , namely , “ adornment , ” but not by giving exaggerated attention to the “ braiding of the hair ” or “ the wearing of outer garments . ” 
 Rather , Peter said : “ Let [ your adornment ] be the secret person of the heart in the incorruptible apparel of the quiet and mild spirit , which is of great value in the eyes of God . ” 
 This spirit is reflected in a tone of voice and a manner that are becoming rather than challenging or demanding . 
 Thus a Christian wife shows her deep respect for her husband . ​ — 1 Peter 3 : 3 , 4 . 
 Examples to Learn From 
 In what ways is Sarah a fine example for Christian wives ? 
 Peter wrote : “ Formerly the holy women who were hoping in God used to adorn themselves , subjecting themselves to their own husbands . ” 
 Such ones realized that pleasing Jehovah by heeding his counsel would ultimately result in family happiness and the reward of everlasting life . 
 Peter mentions Sarah , the beautiful wife of Abraham , noting that she “ used to obey Abraham , calling him ‘ lord . ’ ” 
 Sarah supported her God - fearing husband , whom God had assigned to serve in a distant land . 
 She gave up a comfortable lifestyle and even put her life in jeopardy . 
 Peter recommended Sarah for her courageous example , saying : “ You have become her children , provided you keep on doing good and not fearing any cause for terror . ” ​ — 1 Peter 3 : 6 . 
 Why might Peter have had Abigail in mind as an example for Christian wives ? 
 Abigail was another fearless woman who hoped in God , and Peter may have had her in mind as well . 
 She “ was good in discretion , ” but her husband Nabal “ was harsh and bad in his practices . ” 
 When Nabal refused to give assistance to David and his men , they prepared to wipe out Nabal and his entire household . 
 But Abigail took action to save her household . 
 She loaded supplies of food on asses and met David as he and his armed men were en route . 
 Catching sight of David , she dismounted , fell at his feet , and entreated him not to act rashly . 
 David was deeply moved . 
 “ Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel , who has sent you this day to meet me ! ” 
 he said , “ and blessed be your sensibleness . ” ​ — 1 Samuel 25 : 2 - 33 . 
 If tempted by the amorous attentions of another man , wives can reflect on what example , and why ? 
 Another fine example for wives is that of a young Shulammite woman who remained loyal to the humble shepherd to whom she was promised in marriage . 
 Her love for him remained strong despite the amorous attentions of a wealthy potentate . 
 Moved to express her feelings for the young shepherd , she said : “ Place me as a seal upon your heart , as a seal upon your arm ; because love is as strong as death is . . . 
 Many waters themselves are not able to extinguish love , nor can rivers themselves wash it away . ” 
 May it also be the resolve of all those who accept a marriage proposal to remain loyal to their husbands and deeply respect them . 
 Additional Divine Counsel 
 19 , 20 . ( a ) For what reason should wives be in subjection to their husbands ? 
 ( b ) What fine example has been provided for wives ? 
 Finally , consider the context of our theme scripture : “ Wives be in subjection to [ your ] husbands . ” 
 Why is such subjection necessary ? 
 “ Because , ” the next verse continues , “ a husband is head of his wife as the Christ also is head of the congregation . ” 
 Therefore , wives are urged : “ As the congregation is in subjection to the Christ , so let wives also be to their husbands in everything . ” ​ — Ephesians 5 : 23 , 24 , 33 . 
 To obey this command , wives need to study and then imitate the example of Christ’s congregation of anointed followers . 
 Please read 2 Corinthians 11 : 23 - 28 and thereby learn what one member of the congregation , the apostle Paul , endured in being faithful to his Head , Jesus Christ . 
 Like Paul , wives as well as the rest of the congregation need to remain loyally subject to Jesus . 
 Wives demonstrate this by their subjection to their husbands . 
 What can serve as incentives for wives to remain subject to their husbands ? 
 While many wives today may chafe at being in subjection , a wise woman will consider its advantages . 
 For example , in the case of a husband who is an unbeliever , submitting to his headship in all matters that would not mean violating God’s laws or principles may well yield the marvelous reward of her being able to ‘ save her husband . ’ 
 Furthermore , she can find contentment in knowing that Jehovah God approves of her course and will richly reward her for imitating the example of his dear Son . 
 Do You Remember ? 
 • Why may it be a challenge for a wife to respect her husband ? 
 • Why is accepting a marriage proposal so serious ? 
 • How did Jesus serve as an example for wives , and what benefits may result from following his example ? 
 [ Picture on page 19 ] 
 Why is deciding whether to accept a marriage proposal so serious ? 
 [ Picture on page 21 ] 
 What can wives learn from the example of such Bible characters as Abigail ? 
 “ Children , Be Obedient to Your Parents ” 
 “ Children , be obedient to your parents in union with the Lord , for this is righteous . ” ​ — EPHESIANS 6 : 1 . 
 How can obedience protect you ? 
 WE MAY be alive now because we obeyed , while others are not alive because they failed to obey . 
 Obey what ? 
 Warnings , for example , from our “ wonderfully made ” bodies . 
 Our eyes see dark clouds , and our ears hear claps of thunder . 
 Then , the electrical charge in the air makes our hair stand on end . 
 To those who have been taught about the potential dangers , these signs are a warning to seek a place of safety from the impending storm with its lightning and hailstones that may be life threatening . 
 Why do children need warnings , and why should they obey their parents ? 
 You young ones need warnings about potential dangers , and your parents have the responsibility to provide them . 
 You may recall being told : “ Don’t touch the stove . 
 It’s hot . ” 
 “ Stay away from the water . 
 It’s dangerous . ” 
 “ Look both ways before you cross the street . ” 
 Sadly , children have been hurt or even killed for failing to obey . 
 To be obedient to your parents “ is righteous ” ​ — right and proper . 
 It is also wise . 
 Another Bible text says that it is “ well - pleasing ” to our Lord Jesus Christ . 
 Indeed , God commands you to obey your parents . ​ — Colossians 3 : 20 ; 1 Corinthians 8 : 6 . 
 Lasting Rewards of Obedience 
 What is “ the real life ” for most of us , and how can children hope to enjoy it ? 
 Obedience to your parents protects your “ life now , ” but obedience will also make it possible for you to enjoy the life “ which is to come , ” called “ the real life . ” 
 For most of us , the real life is endless life on earth in God’s new world , which he promises to those who faithfully adhere to his commandments . 
 A chief one of these commandments says : “ ‘ Honor your father and your mother ’ ; which is the first command with a promise : ‘ That it may go well with you and you may endure a long time on the earth . ’ ” 
 So if you obey your parents , you will be happy . 
 Your future will be secure , and you will be in line to enjoy everlasting life on a paradise earth ! ​ — Ephesians 6 : 2 , 3 . 
 How can children honor God and thus benefit ? 
 When you honor your parents by obeying them , you also honor God because he is the one who commands you to obey them . 
 At the same time , you benefit . 
 “ I , Jehovah , am your God , the One teaching you to benefit yourself , ” the Bible says . 
 How does being obedient benefit you ? 
 It makes your mother and father happy , and in turn , they will certainly show their pleasure in ways that will make your life happier . 
 But most important , your obedience makes your heavenly Father happy , and he will reward you in marvelous ways ! 
 Let us see how Jehovah blessed and protected Jesus , who said about himself : “ I always do the things pleasing to him . ” ​ — John 8 : 29 . 
 Jesus ​ — A Good Worker 
 What reasons are there for believing that Jesus was a good worker ? 
 Jesus was the firstborn of his mother , Mary . 
 His adoptive father , Joseph , was a carpenter . 
 Jesus too became a carpenter , evidently learning the trade from Joseph . 
 What kind of carpenter do you think Jesus was ? 
 When he was in heaven , before he was miraculously conceived by his virgin mother , as wisdom personified , he explained : “ I came to be beside [ God ] as a master worker , and I came to be the one he was specially fond of day by day . ” 
 God approved of Jesus , who in heaven was a good worker . 
 Do you think that when he was a youngster on earth he also tried hard to be a good worker , a good carpenter ? ​ — Proverbs 8 : 30 ; Colossians 1 : 15 , 16 . 
 ( a ) Why do you think Jesus as a child may have worked at home ? 
 ( b ) In what ways can children imitate Jesus ? 
 No doubt , when Jesus was a child , he sometimes played games , even as the Bible says children did in early times . 
 Yet , you can be sure that as the oldest child in a large family of modest means , he had chores to do in addition to receiving training from Joseph to become a carpenter . 
 Later , Jesus became a preacher and devoted himself to his ministry to the extent of sacrificing personal comforts . 
 Can you see ways in which you can imitate Jesus ? 
 Do your parents ask you to clean your room or do other chores ? 
 Do they encourage you to participate in worship of God by attending Christian meetings and sharing your beliefs with others ? 
 How do you think the young Jesus would have responded to similar requests ? 
 A Fine Bible Student and Teacher 
 ( a ) With whom may Jesus have traveled to the Passover ? 
 ( b ) Where was Jesus when others began the journey home , and why was he there ? 
 All male members of an Israelite family were commanded to go up to worship Jehovah at the temple during the three Jewish festivals . 
 When Jesus was 12 years old , his whole family may have made the trip to Jerusalem for the Passover . 
 That likely included half brothers and half sisters . 
 However , those traveling with Jesus ’ family may have included Salome , who was possibly Mary’s sister , along with her husband Zebedee and their sons James and John , who later became apostles . 
 * On the return trip , Joseph and Mary may have assumed that Jesus was with relatives , so at first his absence was not noticed . 
 Three days later , when Mary and Joseph finally found Jesus , he was in the temple , “ sitting in the midst of the teachers and listening to them and questioning them . ” ​ — Luke 2 : 44 - 46 . 
 What did Jesus do in the temple , and why were people amazed ? 
 In what way was Jesus “ questioning ” the teachers ? 
 His questioning may not have been merely the type to satisfy his curiosity or simply to get information . 
 The Greek word used here could refer to questioning as used in judicial examination and thus could involve counterquestioning . 
 Yes , even as a youth , Jesus had developed into a Bible student who astonished learned religious teachers ! 
 “ All those listening to him were in constant amazement at his understanding and his answers , ” the Bible says . ​ — Luke 2 : 47 . 
 How can you follow Jesus ’ example in studying the Bible ? 
 How do you think that at a young age Jesus was able to amaze even experienced teachers with his Bible knowledge ? 
 He was , of course , blessed with God - fearing parents who provided him from infancy with divine instruction . 
 We can be sure that Joseph took young Jesus to the synagogue to hear the Scriptures read and discussed . 
 Are you too blessed with parents who study the Bible with you and take you to Christian meetings ? 
 Do you value their efforts , as Jesus appreciated those of his parents ? 
 Do you share with others what you learn , as Jesus did ? 
 Jesus Was Submissive 
 ( a ) Why should Jesus ’ parents have known where to find him ? 
 ( b ) What fine example did Jesus provide for children ? 
 How do you think Mary and Joseph felt when after three days they finally found Jesus in the temple ? 
 No doubt , they were greatly relieved . 
 Jesus , though , expressed surprise that his parents had not known where he was . 
 Both of them knew about Jesus ’ miraculous birth . 
 In addition , although not aware of all the details , they would have known something about his future role as Savior and as Ruler of God’s Kingdom . 
 Hence , Jesus asked them : “ Why did you have to go looking for me ? 
 Did you not know that I must be in the house of my Father ? ” 
 Obediently , however , Jesus left with his parents and returned home to Nazareth . 
 The Bible says : “ He continued subject to them . ” 
 Furthermore , “ his mother carefully kept all these sayings in her heart . ” ​ — Luke 2 : 48 - 51 . 
 What lesson about obedience can you learn from Jesus ? 
 Do you find it easy to imitate Jesus , always obeying your parents ? 
 Or do you feel that they often do not understand today’s world and that you know more than they do ? 
 Granted , you may know more about certain things ​ — perhaps about using cell phones , computers , or other modern gadgets . 
 But think about Jesus , who amazed experienced teachers with “ his understanding and his answers . ” 
 You will probably agree that compared with him , you know little . 
 Yet , Jesus was submissive to his parents . 
 This does not necessarily mean that he always agreed with their decisions . 
 Nevertheless , “ he continued subject to them ” ​ — right through his teenage years . 
 What lesson do you think you can learn from his example ? ​ — Deuteronomy 5 : 16 , 29 . 
 Obedience ​ — A Challenge 
 How may obedience save your life ? 
 It is not always easy to be obedient , as illustrated a few years ago when two young girls were about to dash across a six - lane highway rather than take the overpass walkway . 
 “ Come on John , ” they urged a companion as he headed toward the walkway above . 
 “ You’re going with us , aren’t you ? ” 
 When he hesitated , one girl taunted him , “ You’re just a chicken ! ” 
 John , although unafraid , said , “ I just have to listen to my mother . ” 
 On the walkway moments later , he heard screeching tires and looked down just as the girls were hit by a car . 
 One girl died , and the other was so badly hurt that her leg had to be amputated . 
 The girls ’ mother , who had told them to use the elevated walkway , later said to John’s mother , “ I sure wish they had been as obedient as your son . ” ​ — Ephesians 6 : 1 . 
 ( a ) Why should you obey your parents ? 
 ( b ) When would it be proper for a child not to do what a parent tells him to do ? 
 Why does God say : “ Children , be obedient to your parents ” ? 
 By obeying your parents , you thereby obey God . 
 Besides that , your parents have more experience than you do . 
 For example , just five years before the accident related above , John’s mother had a friend whose child was killed trying to cross that very highway ! 
 True , it may not always be easy to obey your parents , but God says that you should . 
 On the other hand , if your parents ​ — or others — ​ tell you to lie , steal , or do anything that is disapproved by God , you must “ obey God as ruler rather than men . ” 
 That is why after saying “ be obedient to your parents , ” the Bible adds , “ in union with the Lord . ” 
 This involves your obeying your parents in all things that are in harmony with God’s laws . ​ — Acts 5 : 29 . 
 Why is obedience easier for someone perfect , yet why would he need to learn about it ? 
 Do you think that if you were perfect ​ — that is , “ undefiled , separated from the sinners , ” as was Jesus — ​ it would always be easy to obey your parents ? 
 If you were perfect , you would not be inclined to do what is bad , as you are now . 
 Even Jesus , however , had to learn lessons about obedience . 
 The Bible says : “ Although [ Jesus ] was a Son , he learned obedience from the things he suffered . ” 
 How did suffering help Jesus to learn obedience , a lesson he never had to learn in heaven ? 
 15 , 16 . 
 How did Jesus learn obedience ? 
 Under Jehovah’s direction , Joseph and Mary protected Jesus from harm when he was a child . 
 Eventually , though , God removed supernatural protection from Jesus . 
 Jesus ’ mental and physical suffering became so great that the Bible says that he “ offered up supplications and also petitions . . . with strong outcries and tears . ” 
 When did this happen ? 
 In particular , it occurred during the final hours of Jesus ’ earthly life when Satan made an all - out attempt to break His integrity . 
 Jesus was evidently so tortured by thoughts of how his death as a supposed evildoer might reflect badly on his Father’s reputation that as “ he continued praying [ in the garden of Gethsemane ] his sweat became as drops of blood falling to the ground . ” 
 A few hours later , his manner of death on a torture stake was so painful that Jesus uttered “ strong outcries [ with ] tears . ” 
 He thus “ learned obedience from the things he suffered ” and thereby made his Father’s heart rejoice . 
 Now in heaven , Jesus feels our pain as we often struggle to be obedient . ​ — Proverbs 27 : 11 ; Hebrews 2 : 18 ; 4 : 15 . 
 Learning the Lesson of Obedience 
 How should we view receiving discipline ? 
 When your father and mother discipline you , it shows that they want the best for you , that they love you . 
 “ What son is he that a father does not discipline ? ” 
 the Bible asks . 
 Would it not be sad if your parents did not love you enough to take the time and make the effort to correct you ? 
 Similarly , because Jehovah loves you , he corrects you . 
 “ True , no discipline seems for the present to be joyous , but grievous ; yet afterward to those who have been trained by it it yields peaceable fruit , namely , righteousness . ” ​ — Hebrews 12 : 7 - 11 . 
 ( a ) Of what is loving discipline an evidence ? 
 ( b ) In what positive ways have you seen people molded by such discipline ? 
 A king in ancient Israel , whom Jesus noted for his great wisdom , spoke of the need for loving , parental correction . 
 “ The one holding back his rod is hating his son , ” Solomon wrote , “ but the one loving him is he that does look for him with discipline . ” 
 Solomon even said that a person receiving loving correction may have his very soul delivered from death itself . 
 One Christian woman recalls that as a child when she misbehaved at Christian meetings , her father would promise to discipline her on returning home . 
 Now she remembers her father with affection for providing her with loving discipline that molded her life in a fine way . 
 Why especially should you obey your parents ? 
 If you have parents who love you enough to take the time and make the effort to discipline you in a loving way , be grateful . 
 Obey them , even as our Lord Jesus Christ obeyed his parents , Joseph and Mary . 
 But obey them especially because your heavenly Father , Jehovah God , says to do so . 
 You will thereby benefit yourself , and it “ may go well with you and you may endure a long time on the earth . ” ​ — Ephesians 6 : 2 , 3 . 
 [ Footnote ] 
 See Insight on the Scriptures , Volume 2 , page 841 , published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • What are the benefits children may receive from obeying their parents ? 
 • As a child , how did Jesus set an example in obeying his parents ? 
 • How did Jesus learn obedience ? 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 Twelve - year - old Jesus was well - versed in the Scriptures 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 How did Jesus learn obedience from suffering ? 
 The Resurrection ​ — Is It Real to You ? 
 “ There is going to be a resurrection . ” ​ — ACTS 24 : 15 . 
 Why does death seem certain ? 
 “ IN THIS world nothing is certain but death and taxes . ” 
 That comment , penned in 1789 by American statesman Benjamin Franklin , has struck some as clever . 
 However , many dishonest people cheat on their taxes . 
 Death seems far more certain . 
 On our own , none of us can avoid it in the long run . 
 It pursues us all . 
 With an insatiable hunger , Sheol ​ — the common grave of mankind — ​ devours people dear to us . 
 But consider a comforting thought . 
 2 , 3 . ( a ) Why is death less certain than many realize ? 
 ( b ) What will we consider in this article ? 
 Jehovah’s Word gives the sure hope of the resurrection , of being raised to life once again . 
 This is no mere dream , and no force in the universe can prevent Jehovah from making this hope a reality . 
 For some , though , death is less certain than many today realize . 
 Why ? 
 Because an unnumbered “ great crowd ” will survive “ the great tribulation , ” soon to come . 
 They will live on afterward , with eternity in view . 
 Thus , death is no certainty for them . 
 Moreover , “ death is to be brought to nothing . ” ​ — 1 Corinthians 15 : 26 . 
 We need to feel as certain of the resurrection as did the apostle Paul , who said : “ There is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous . ” 
 Let us consider three questions regarding the resurrection . 
 First , what makes this hope so certain ? 
 Second , how can you personally take comfort in the resurrection hope ? 
 Third , how may this hope affect the way you live right now ? 
 The Resurrection ​ — A Certainty 
 How is the resurrection central to Jehovah’s purpose ? 
 There are a number of factors that make the resurrection a certainty . 
 Above all , it is central to Jehovah’s purpose . 
 Remember , Satan led mankind into sin , with its inevitable consequence , death . 
 Thus , Jesus said of Satan : “ That one was a manslayer when he began . ” 
 But Jehovah promised that his “ woman , ” or wifelike organization in heaven , would produce a “ seed ” who would bruise that “ original serpent ” in the head , crushing Satan out of existence . 
 As Jehovah gradually revealed his purpose involving that Messianic Seed , it became apparent that the Seed would do more than destroy Satan . 
 God’s Word says : “ For this purpose the Son of God was made manifest , namely , to break up the works of the Devil . ” 
 Death caused by the sin we inherited from Adam is chief among Satan’s works that Jehovah purposes to see undone , or broken up , through Jesus Christ . 
 In this regard , Jesus ’ ransom sacrifice and the resurrection are vitally important . ​ — Acts 2 : 22 - 24 ; Romans 6 : 23 . 
 Why will the resurrection glorify Jehovah’s name ? 
 Jehovah is determined to glorify his sacred name . 
 Satan has maligned God’s name and has promoted lies . 
 He lyingly said that Adam and Eve ‘ positively would not die ’ if they partook of the fruit forbidden by God . 
 Ever since , Satan has fostered similar lies , such as the false teaching that a soul survives the death of the body . 
 However , by means of the resurrection , Jehovah will expose all such lies for what they are . 
 He will establish for all time that he alone is the Preserver and Restorer of life . 
 6 , 7 . 
 How does Jehovah feel about resurrecting people , and how do we know of his feelings ? 
 Jehovah yearns to carry out the resurrection . 
 The Bible makes clear Jehovah’s feelings in this regard . 
 For instance , consider these inspired words of the faithful man Job : “ If an able - bodied man dies can he live again ? 
 All the days of my compulsory service I shall wait , until my relief comes . 
 You will call , and I myself shall answer you . 
 For the work of your hands you will have a yearning . ” 
 What do those words mean ? 
 Job knew that after he died , a time of waiting in the sleep of death lay ahead of him . 
 He viewed that time as “ compulsory service , ” an enforced period of waiting for release . 
 To him , that release was a certainty . 
 Job realized that his relief would come . 
 Why ? 
 Because he knew of Jehovah’s feelings . 
 Jehovah would “ have a yearning ” to see his faithful servant again . 
 Yes , God longs to bring back to life all righteous individuals . 
 Jehovah will also give others an opportunity to live forever in Paradise on earth . 
 Since it is God’s will to carry out that purpose , who can stop him ? 
 How has Jehovah “ furnished a guarantee ” of our hope for the future ? 
 Our hope for the future is guaranteed by the resurrection of Jesus . 
 When Paul gave a speech in Athens , he declared : “ [ God ] has set a day in which he purposes to judge the inhabited earth in righteousness by a man whom he has appointed , and he has furnished a guarantee to all men in that he has resurrected him from the dead . ” 
 Some in Paul’s audience mocked when they heard of a resurrection . 
 A few , however , became believers . 
 Perhaps the thought that this hope is guaranteed caught their attention . 
 When Jehovah resurrected Jesus , He performed the greatest of miracles . 
 He brought his Son forth from death to life as a mighty spirit . 
 The resurrected Jesus was even greater than he had been during his prehuman existence . 
 Immortal and second only to Jehovah in power , Jesus is now in a position to take on wonderful assignments from his Father . 
 Jesus is the means by which Jehovah performs all other resurrections ​ — to life in heaven or to life on earth . 
 Jesus himself said : “ I am the resurrection and the life . ” 
 By resurrecting his Son , Jehovah guaranteed such hopes for all faithful ones . 
 How does the Bible record establish the reality of the resurrection ? 
 The resurrection has been demonstrated before eyewitnesses and recorded in God’s Word . 
 The Bible record contains detailed descriptions of eight resurrections of people brought back to life as humans on earth . 
 These miracles were performed not in secret but openly , often in front of eyewitnesses . 
 Jesus resurrected Lazarus , who had been dead for four days , in front of a crowd of mourners ​ — no doubt including the man’s family , friends , and neighbors . 
 This evidence that Jesus was sent by God was so forceful that Jesus ’ religious enemies never denied that it had happened . 
 Instead , they plotted to kill not only Jesus but also Lazarus ! 
 Yes , we can have confidence that the resurrection is a certainty . 
 God has given us a record of past resurrections in order to comfort us and to build up our faith . 
 Finding Comfort in the Resurrection Hope 
 What will help us to draw comfort from the Bible’s resurrection accounts ? 
 Do you long for comfort in the face of death ? 
 One sure source of comfort can be found in the Bible’s resurrection accounts . 
 Reading such accounts , meditating on them , and visualizing the events can make the resurrection hope more real to you . 
 These are not just stories . 
 They actually happened to real people like us , living at a real time and in a real place . 
 Let us focus briefly on one example ​ — the first resurrection in the Bible record . 
 11 , 12 . ( a ) What tragedy befell the widow of Zarephath , and how did she respond at first ? 
 ( b ) Describe what Jehovah empowered his prophet Elijah to do for the widow . 
 Picture the scene . 
 For some weeks , the prophet Elijah has been a guest of the widow of Zarephath , living in a chamber on her roof . 
 It is a dark era . 
 The region is stricken by drought and famine . 
 Many are dying . 
 Jehovah has already used Elijah to perform a prolonged miracle to reward the faith of this humble widow . 
 She and her young son were on the brink of starvation , down to their last meal , when God empowered Elijah to perform a miracle so that her supply of flour and oil was miraculously sustained . 
 Now , though , tragedy befalls her . 
 Illness suddenly strikes the child , and soon he stops breathing . 
 How devastated the widow is ! 
 It is bad enough to live without the strength and support of a husband , but now she has lost her only child . 
 In her grief , she even blames Elijah and his God , Jehovah ! 
 What will the prophet do ? 
 Elijah does not reprove the widow for her false accusation . 
 Instead , he says : “ Give me your son . ” 
 After carrying the dead child to the roof chamber , Elijah prays repeatedly for the child’s life to be returned . 
 Finally , Jehovah acts ! 
 Imagine the joy spreading over Elijah’s face as he sees the boy’s chest heave with the intake of air . 
 The child’s eyelids open , and his eyes glisten with life . 
 Elijah brings the boy down to his mother and says : “ See , your son is alive . ” 
 Her joy is beyond description . 
 She says : “ Now , indeed , I do know that you are a man of God and that Jehovah’s word in your mouth is true . ” 
 Her faith in Jehovah and in his representative is stronger than ever . 
 Why does the account about Elijah resurrecting a widow’s son bring comfort to us today ? 
 Meditating on such an account surely brings you great comfort . 
 How clear it is that Jehovah is able to defeat our enemy death ! 
 Just imagine the day when that widow’s joy is multiplied thousands of times over in the general resurrection of the dead ! 
 The joy in heaven will also be great as Jehovah delights in directing his Son to carry out resurrections on a global scale . 
 Has death taken someone dear to you ? 
 How wonderful it is to know that Jehovah can and will restore the dead to life ! 
 Your Hope and Your Life Now 
 How can the resurrection hope affect your life ? 
 How can the resurrection hope affect the way you live right now ? 
 You can draw strength from this hope when facing hardships , challenges , persecution , or danger . 
 Satan wants you to be so terrified of death that you would willingly barter your integrity for some hollow promise of safety . 
 Remember that Satan said to Jehovah : “ Everything that a man has he will give in behalf of his soul . ” 
 In making such a statement , Satan maligned all of us , including you . 
 Is it true that you will quit serving God if you face danger ? 
 By contemplating the hope of the resurrection , you can make firm your determination to keep on doing the will of your heavenly Father . 
 How might Jesus ’ words recorded at Matthew 10 : 28 bring us comfort in the face of danger ? 
 Jesus said : “ Do not become fearful of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul ; but rather be in fear of him that can destroy both soul and body in Gehenna . ” 
 We need not be in dread of Satan or his human agents . 
 True , some may have the power to cause harm , even death . 
 However , the worst they can do is still only temporary . 
 Jehovah can and will undo any damage done to his faithful servants , even resurrecting them . 
 It is Jehovah alone who is worthy of our fear , our profound awe and respect . 
 He alone has the power to take away life and all prospects for future life , destroying both body and soul in Gehenna . 
 Happily , Jehovah does not want that to happen to you . 
 Because of the resurrection hope , we as God’s servants can always be sure that we are safe . 
 Everlasting life lies ahead of us as long as we are faithful , and there is nothing that Satan or his minions can do about that . ​ — Psalm 118 : 6 ; Hebrews 13 : 6 . 
 How does our viewpoint affect the priorities that we set ? 
 If the resurrection hope is real to us , it can shape our attitude about life . 
 We realize that ‘ whether we live or we die , we belong to Jehovah . ’ 
 In setting priorities , we therefore apply Paul’s counsel : “ Quit being fashioned after this system of things , but be transformed by making your mind over , that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God . ” 
 Many people are in a frantic rush to gratify every desire , every ambition , every impulse . 
 Because they view life as being short , they seem almost desperate in their pursuit of pleasure , and if they have a form of worship , it certainly does not harmonize with the “ perfect will of God . ” 
 17 , 18 . ( a ) How does Jehovah’s Word acknowledge the shortness of human life , but what does God want for us ? 
 ( b ) Why are we moved to praise Jehovah daily ? 
 True , life is short . 
 “ It must quickly pass by , and away we fly , ” perhaps in some 70 or 80 years . 
 Humans come and go like green grass , like a passing shadow , like an exhalation . 
 But God did not purpose that we spend a few decades growing up and gaining some wisdom and experience , only to spend the next few decades breaking down and descending into illness and death . 
 Jehovah created humans with the desire to live forever . 
 “ Time indefinite he has put in their heart , ” the Bible tells us . 
 Is God cruel , giving us such a desire and then making it impossible to fulfill it ? 
 No , indeed , for “ God is love . ” 
 He will use the resurrection to make everlasting life possible for people who have died . 
 Thanks to the resurrection hope , we can have a secure future . 
 We need not be frantic , driven to reach our full potential right now . 
 We need not make use of this dying world “ to the full . ” 
 Unlike those with no real hope , we have the wonderful gift of knowing that if we remain faithful to Jehovah God , we will have all eternity to laud him and enjoy life . 
 By all means , then , let us daily praise Jehovah , who makes the resurrection hope a certainty ! 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • How should we feel about the resurrection ? 
 • What factors make the resurrection hope a certainty ? 
 • How may you draw comfort from the resurrection hope ? 
 • What effect might the resurrection hope have on the way you live ? 
 [ Picture on page 28 ] 
 Job knew that Jehovah yearns to resurrect the righteous 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 “ See , your son is alive ” 
 Thriving Spiritually During Gray - Headedness 
 “ Those who are planted in the house of Jehovah . . . will still keep on thriving during gray - headedness . ” ​ — PSALM 92 : 13 , 14 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) How is old age often described ? 
 ( b ) What do the Scriptures promise with regard to the effects of Adamic sin ? 
 OLD AGE ​ — what does that expression bring to your mind ? 
 Wrinkled skin ? 
 Poor hearing ? 
 Feeble limbs ? 
 Or another aspect of “ the calamitous days ” depicted in vivid detail at Ecclesiastes 12 : 1 - 7 ? 
 If so , it is important to bear in mind that the description found in Ecclesiastes chapter 12 portrays aging , not as what the Creator , Jehovah God , originally intended , but as the consequence of Adamic sin on the human body . ​ — Romans 5 : 12 . 
 Aging in itself is not a curse , for continued existence requires the passing of years . 
 In fact , growth and maturity are desirable characteristics of all living things . 
 The ravages of six thousand years of sin and imperfection that we see around us will soon be a thing of the past , and all obedient humans will enjoy life as it was intended , without the pain of old age and death . 
 At that time , “ no resident will say : ‘ I am sick . ’ ” 
 Elderly ones will return to the days of their “ youthful vigor , ” and their flesh will “ become fresher than in youth . ” 
 For the present , however , all must contend with the Adamic inheritance . 
 Yet , servants of Jehovah are blessed in special ways as they move into their older years . 
 In what ways can Christians “ keep on thriving during gray - headedness ” ? 
 God’s Word assures us that “ those who are planted in the house of Jehovah . . . will still keep on thriving during gray - headedness . ” 
 In figurative language , the psalmist set out the fundamental truth that faithful servants of God can continue to progress , flourish , and prosper spiritually , even if they are declining physically . 
 Many Biblical and modern - day examples bear this out . 
 “ Never Missing ” 
 How did aged prophetess Anna show her devotion to God , and how was she rewarded ? 
 Consider the first - century prophetess Anna . 
 At 84 years of age , she was “ never missing from the temple , rendering sacred service night and day with fastings and supplications . ” 
 As a woman whose father was a non - Levite “ of Asher’s tribe , ” Anna could not literally live at the temple . 
 Imagine what it must have taken for her to be at the temple daily from the time of the morning service to the time of the evening service ! 
 For her devotion , however , Anna was richly rewarded . 
 She was privileged to be on hand when Joseph and Mary brought the infant Jesus to the temple to be presented to Jehovah according to the Law . 
 At the sight of Jesus , Anna “ began returning thanks to God and speaking about the child to all those waiting for Jerusalem’s deliverance . ” ​ — Luke 2 : 22 - 24 , 36 - 38 ; Numbers 18 : 6 , 7 . 
 5 , 6 . 
 In what ways are many aged ones today manifesting a spirit like that of Anna ? 
 Many aged ones among us today are like Anna in their regular meeting attendance , their earnest supplication for the advancement of true worship , and their irrepressible desire to preach the good news . 
 A brother in his 80 ’ s who attends Christian meetings regularly with his wife said : “ We have cultivated the custom of going to the meetings . 
 We don’t want to be anywhere else . 
 Where God’s people are , that’s where we want to be . 
 That’s where we feel comfortable . ” 
 What an encouraging example for all ! ​ — Hebrews 10 : 24 , 25 . 
 “ If anything spiritual comes my way and I can be a part of it , I want to do so . ” 
 That is the motto of Jean , a Christian widow in her 80 ’ s . 
 “ Of course , I have my sad moments , ” she continues , “ but why should everybody around me be sad when I am ? ” 
 With eyes gleaming , she expressed the joy of visiting other lands for upbuilding spiritual occasions . 
 On a recent trip , she told her companions , “ I don’t want to see any more castles ; I want to go out in the field ministry ! ” 
 Although she did not know the local language , Jean was able to arouse people’s interest in the Bible’s message . 
 In addition , for a number of years , she worked with a congregation that needed assistance , even though this meant learning a new language and traveling an hour each way to the meetings . 
 Keeping the Mind Active 
 During his advanced years , how did Moses express his desire to grow in his relationship with God ? 
 Experience in life comes with the passing of time . 
 Spiritual advancement , on the other hand , does not come automatically with age . 
 Therefore , rather than merely relying on a reserve of knowledge acquired in the past , loyal servants of God strive to “ increase in learning ” as the years go by . 
 When Jehovah commissioned him , Moses was 80 years old . 
 By his day , living to that age was evidently considered unusual , for he wrote : “ In themselves the days of our years are seventy years ; and . . . because of special mightiness they are eighty years . ” 
 Still , Moses never felt that he was too old to learn . 
 After decades of serving God , enjoying many privileges , and carrying weighty responsibilities , Moses pleaded with Jehovah : “ Make me know , please , your ways , that I may know you . ” 
 Moses was ever desirous of growing in his relationship with Jehovah . 
 How did Daniel keep his mind active into his 90 ’ s , and with what results ? 
 The prophet Daniel , likely in his 90 ’ s , could still be found poring over the holy writings . 
 What he discerned through his study of “ the books ” ​ — possibly including Leviticus , Isaiah , Jeremiah , Hosea , and Amos — ​ moved him to seek Jehovah in fervent prayer . 
 That prayer was answered with inspired information regarding the coming of the Messiah and the future of pure worship . ​ — Daniel 9 : 20 - 27 . 
 9 , 10 . 
 What have some done to keep the mind active ? 
 Like Moses and Daniel , we can strive to keep our mind active by focusing on spiritual matters for as long as we are able . 
 Many are doing just that . 
 Worth , a Christian elder in his 80 ’ s , endeavors to keep up - to - date with the spiritual food dispensed by “ the faithful and discreet slave . ” 
 He says , “ I’m just absolutely in love with the truth , and I’m thrilled to see how the light of truth gets brighter and brighter . ” 
 Similarly , Fred , who has spent more than 60 years in the full - time ministry , finds it spiritually stimulating to initiate Bible discussions with fellow believers . 
 “ I have to keep the Bible alive in my mind , ” he says . 
 “ If you can make the Bible live ​ — make it meaningful — ​ and if you can fit what you are learning into ‘ the pattern of healthful words , ’ then you don’t just have isolated pieces of information . 
 You can see how each piece sparkles in its proper place . ” ​ — 2 Timothy 1 : 13 . 
 Being advanced in age does not necessarily preclude the learning of new and difficult concepts . 
 People in their 60 ’ s , 70 ’ s , and even 80 ’ s have overcome illiteracy or have learned new languages . 
 Some of Jehovah’s Witnesses have done so with the objective of sharing the good news with people of different nationalities . 
 Harry and his wife were in their late 60 ’ s when they decided to assist in the Portuguese field . 
 “ Let’s face it , ” says Harry , “ any task in life becomes more difficult with age . ” 
 Still , with effort and persistence , they were able to conduct Bible studies in Portuguese . 
 For many years now , Harry has also given district convention talks in his new language . 
 Why consider the accomplishments of faithful older ones ? 
 Of course , not everyone has the health or circumstances to take on such challenges . 
 Why , then , consider what some older ones have accomplished ? 
 It is certainly not to suggest that all should strive to achieve the same things . 
 Rather , it is in the spirit of what the apostle Paul wrote to the Hebrew Christians concerning faithful congregation elders : “ As you contemplate how their conduct turns out imitate their faith . ” 
 When we contemplate such examples of zeal , we can be encouraged to imitate the strong faith that impels these older ones in their service to God . 
 Explaining what motivates him , Harry , now 87 years of age , says , “ I’d like to use my remaining years wisely and be as useful as possible in Jehovah’s service . ” 
 Fred , mentioned earlier , finds great satisfaction in caring for his Bethel assignment . 
 He observes , “ You have to find how you can best serve Jehovah and stick to it . ” 
 Devoted Despite Changing Circumstances 
 12 , 13 . 
 How did Barzillai display godly devotion despite his changed circumstances ? 
 Coming to grips with physical changes can be difficult . 
 Nevertheless , it is possible to demonstrate godly devotion despite such changes . 
 Barzillai the Gileadite is a fine example in this regard . 
 At 80 years of age , he showed extraordinary hospitality to David and his army , providing them with food and lodging during Absalom’s rebellion . 
 When David was returning to Jerusalem , Barzillai escorted the entourage to the Jordan River . 
 David offered to make Barzillai a part of his royal court . 
 Barzillai’s response ? 
 “ I am eighty years old today . . . . 
 Could your servant taste what I ate and what I drank , or could I listen anymore to the voice of male and female singers ? . . . 
 Here is your servant Chimham . 
 Let him cross over with my lord the king ; and you do to him what is good in your eyes . ” ​ — 2 Samuel 17 : 27 - 29 ; 19 : 31 - 40 . 
 In spite of his changed circumstances , Barzillai did what he could to support Jehovah’s appointed king . 
 Though he recognized that his sense of taste and of hearing were no longer what they had been , he was not bitter . 
 Instead , by unselfishly recommending that Chimham receive the benefits offered , Barzillai revealed the kind of man that he was at heart . 
 Like Barzillai , many aged ones today display a spirit of unselfishness and generosity . 
 They do what they can to support true worship , knowing that “ with such sacrifices God is well pleased . ” 
 What a blessing to have loyal ones in our midst ! ​ — Hebrews 13 : 16 . 
 How does David’s advanced age add meaning to the words recorded at Psalm 37 : 23 - 25 ? 
 Though David’s circumstances changed many times over the years , he remained convinced that Jehovah’s care for his loyal servants never changes . 
 Toward the end of his life , David composed the song known today as Psalm 37 . 
 Just imagine David in a reflective mood , accompanying himself on the harp and singing these words : “ By Jehovah the very steps of an able - bodied man have been made ready , and in his way He takes delight . 
 Although he may fall , he will not be hurled down , for Jehovah is supporting his hand . 
 A young man I used to be , I have also grown old , and yet I have not seen anyone righteous left entirely , nor his offspring looking for bread . ” 
 Jehovah saw fit to include reference to David’s age in this inspired psalm . 
 What depth of feeling that adds to those heartfelt words ! 
 How did the apostle John set a fine example of faithfulness despite changed circumstances and old age ? 
 The apostle John is another fine example of faithfulness despite changed circumstances and advanced age . 
 After serving God for close to 70 years , John was exiled to the isle of Patmos “ for speaking about God and bearing witness to Jesus . ” 
 Yet , his work was not finished . 
 In fact , all the writings in the Bible that were penned by John were written in the final years of his life . 
 While on Patmos , he was given the awe - inspiring vision of Revelation , which he carefully put down in writing . 
 It is generally thought that he was released from exile during the reign of Roman Emperor Nerva . 
 Thereafter , by about 98 C.E . , when he was probably 90 or 100 years of age , John wrote the Gospel and the three epistles bearing his name . 
 An Unfading Record of Endurance 
 How can those who have become impaired in their ability to communicate demonstrate their devotion to Jehovah ? 
 Limitations can come in many forms and in different degrees . 
 Some individuals , for example , have become impaired even in their ability to communicate . 
 However , they still cherish fond memories of God’s love and undeserved kindness . 
 Though limited in what they can say with their mouth , in their heart they are saying to Jehovah : “ How I do love your law ! 
 All day long it is my concern . ” 
 Jehovah , for his part , knows those who are “ thinking upon his name , ” and he appreciates how different such ones are from the vast majority of mankind , who show no concern for his ways . 
 How comforting it is to know that Jehovah finds pleasure in the meditation of our heart ! ​ — 1 Chronicles 28 : 9 ; Psalm 19 : 14 . 
 What have longtime servants of Jehovah achieved that is truly unique ? 
 Not to be overlooked is the fact that those who have been serving Jehovah faithfully for decades have achieved something that is truly unique and that cannot be acquired in any other way ​ — an unfading record of endurance . 
 Jesus said : “ By endurance on your part you will acquire your souls . ” 
 Endurance is essential for gaining everlasting life . 
 Those of you who have “ done the will of God ” and have proved your loyalty by your life course can look forward to receiving “ the fulfillment of the promise . ” ​ — Hebrews 10 : 36 . 
 ( a ) What is Jehovah delighted to see with regard to older ones ? 
 ( b ) What will we consider in the following article ? 
 Jehovah treasures your whole - souled service regardless of how much or how little you can do . 
 Despite what may be happening to ‘ the man outside ’ as one ages , ‘ the man inside ’ can be renewed from day to day . 
 There is no doubt that Jehovah appreciates what you have accomplished in the past , but it is eminently clear that he also appreciates what you are doing right now for his name . 
 In the following article , we will consider the far - reaching effects of such faithfulness . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • What fine example did Anna set for elderly Christians today ? 
 • Why is age not necessarily a limiting factor in what one can accomplish ? 
 • How can aged ones continue to demonstrate godly devotion ? 
 • How does Jehovah view the service rendered to him by older ones ? 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 Aged Daniel discerned by “ the books ” the duration of Judah’s exile 
 [ Pictures on page 25 ] 
 Many older ones are exemplary in their regular meeting attendance , zealous preaching , and eagerness to learn 
 Elderly Ones ​ — A Blessing to the Young 
 “ Even until old age and gray - headedness , O God , do not leave me , until I may tell about your arm to the generation , to all those who are to come , about your mightiness . ” ​ — PSALM 71 : 18 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What should elderly servants of God appreciate , and what will we now consider ? 
 A CHRISTIAN elder in West Africa visited an aged anointed brother and asked him , “ How are you doing ? ” 
 The brother responded , “ I can run , I can skip , I can jump , and I can hop , ” attempting to act out his words as he said them . 
 “ But , ” he added , “ I cannot fly . ” 
 His intent was understood . 
 ‘ What I can do , I am glad to do , but what I cannot do , I do not do . ’ 
 The elder who made that visit is now in his 80 ’ s , and he fondly remembers that brother’s sense of humor and his loyalty . 
 The godly qualities that an older person manifests can make a long - lasting impression on others . 
 Of course , age alone does not automatically produce wisdom and Christlike qualities . 
 The Bible states : “ Gray - headedness is a crown of beauty when it is found in the way of righteousness . ” 
 If you are advanced in years , do you appreciate just how your words and actions can affect others beneficially ? 
 Consider some Bible examples that show the extent to which aged ones have been a real blessing to younger ones . 
 Faith With Far - Reaching Effects 
 How has Noah’s faithfulness affected all those now living ? 
 The faith and steadfastness of Noah produced benefits that are felt even to this day . 
 Noah was approaching 600 years of age when he built the ark , gathered the animals , and preached to his neighbors . 
 Because of his godly fear , Noah , along with his family , survived the great Flood and became the ancestor of all people living on earth today . 
 True , Noah lived when life spans in general were longer . 
 Yet , even in his most advanced years , Noah remained faithful , and that resulted in significant blessings . 
 How so ? 
 How has Noah’s steadfastness benefited God’s servants today ? 
 Noah was nearly 800 years old when Nimrod began engineering the Tower of Babel in defiance of Jehovah’s command to “ fill the earth . ” 
 Noah , however , had no part in Nimrod’s rebellion . 
 Thus , it is probable that his language was not changed when the rebels had their language confused . 
 Noah’s faith and steadfastness , seen not only in his old age but also throughout his long life , are truly worthy of imitation by God’s servants of all ages . ​ — Hebrews 11 : 7 . 
 Influence on the Family 
 5 , 6 . ( a ) When Abraham was 75 years old , what did Jehovah tell him to do ? 
 ( b ) How did Abraham respond to God’s command ? 
 The influence that elderly ones can have on the faith of their family members can be seen in the lives of the patriarchs after Noah . 
 Abraham was about 75 years old when God said to him : “ Go your way out of your country and from your relatives and from the house of your father to the country that I shall show you ; and I shall make a great nation out of you and I shall bless you . ” ​ — Genesis 12 : 1 , 2 . 
 Imagine being told to leave your home , your friends , the country of your birth , and the security of your extended family to go to a land that you do not know . 
 Abraham was told to do just that . 
 He “ went just as Jehovah had spoken to him , ” and for the rest of his life , he lived in tents as an alien and a migratory resident in the land of Canaan . 
 Though Jehovah had said that Abraham would become “ a great nation , ” he died long before his offspring became numerous . 
 Sarah , his wife , bore him but one son , Isaac , only after Abraham had sojourned in the land of promise for 25 years . 
 Yet , Abraham did not grow weary and return to the city from which he had come . 
 What an example of faith and endurance ! 
 What effect did Abraham’s endurance have on his son Isaac , and with what result to mankind ? 
 Abraham’s endurance had a powerful effect on his son Isaac , who spent his entire life ​ — 180 years — ​ as an alien resident in the land of Canaan . 
 Isaac’s endurance was based on faith in God’s promise , faith that was instilled in him by his aged parents and later reinforced by Jehovah’s own word to him . 
 Isaac’s steadfastness played a key role in the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promise that a “ seed ” for the blessing of all mankind would come through the family of Abraham . 
 Hundreds of years later , Jesus Christ , the primary part of that “ seed , ” opened the way for all who exercise faith in him to be reconciled to God and to enjoy everlasting life . ​ — Galatians 3 : 16 ; John 3 : 16 . 
 How did Jacob demonstrate strong faith , and with what effect ? 
 Isaac , in turn , helped his son Jacob to cultivate strong faith that sustained him into his old age . 
 Jacob was 97 when he wrestled with an angel all night long for a blessing . 
 Before he died at the age of 147 , Jacob summoned enough strength to bless each of his 12 sons . 
 The prophetic words that he uttered , now recorded at Genesis 49 : 1 - 28 , proved true and are still undergoing fulfillment . 
 What can be said about the influence that spiritually mature older ones have on their family ? 
 Clearly , aged loyal servants of God can have a wholesome influence on their family members . 
 Scriptural instruction combined with the voice of experience and an example of endurance can make a real difference in determining whether a young person will grow up with solid faith . 
 Older ones should never underestimate the powerful force for good that they can be to their family . 
 Influence on Fellow Worshippers 
 What was Joseph’s “ command concerning his bones , ” and what was its effect ? 
 Older ones can also be a good influence on fellow believers . 
 In his old age , Jacob’s son Joseph performed a simple act of faith that had a profound effect on millions of true worshippers who lived after him . 
 He was 110 when “ he gave a command concerning his bones , ” namely , that when the Israelites finally left Egypt , they were to take his bones with them . 
 That command served as an added ray of hope for Israel during the many years of hard slavery that followed Joseph’s death , providing assurance that their deliverance would come . 
 What influence did aged Moses likely have on Joshua ? 
 Among those nourished by Joseph’s expression of faith was Moses . 
 When Moses was 80 , he was privileged to carry Joseph’s bones up out of the land of Egypt . 
 About that time , he came in contact with Joshua , who was much younger . 
 For the next 40 years , Joshua served as Moses ’ personal attendant . 
 He accompanied Moses up Mount Sinai and was on hand to meet Moses when he descended from the mountain with the tablets of the Testimony . 
 What a wellspring of mature counsel and wisdom aged Moses must have been to Joshua ! 
 How did Joshua prove to be a force for good to the nation of Israel for as long as he lived ? 
 Joshua , in turn , imparted encouragement to the nation of Israel for as long as he lived . 
 Judges 2 : 7 tells us : “ The people continued to serve Jehovah all the days of Joshua and all the days of the older men who extended their days after Joshua and who had seen all of Jehovah’s great work that he did for Israel . ” 
 With the death of Joshua and the other older men , however , there began a 300 - year period of vacillation between true worship and false , leading up to the days of Samuel the prophet . 
 Samuel “ Effected Righteousness ” 
 What did Samuel do to ‘ effect righteousness ’ ? 
 The Bible does not say how old Samuel was when he died , but events in the book of First Samuel cover about 102 years , and Samuel witnessed most of them . 
 At Hebrews 11 : 32 , 33 , we read that upright judges and prophets “ effected righteousness . ” 
 Yes , Samuel influenced some of his contemporaries to avoid or abandon wrongdoing . 
 By what means ? 
 He was loyal to Jehovah throughout his life . 
 He was not afraid to give strong counsel even to the king . 
 In addition , Samuel , having “ grown old and gray , ” proved himself exemplary in praying with regard to others . 
 He declared it “ unthinkable . . . to sin against Jehovah by ceasing to pray ” in behalf of his fellow Israelites . ​ — 1 Samuel 12 : 2 , 23 . 
 14 , 15 . 
 How might elderly ones today imitate Samuel in the matter of prayer ? 
 All of this highlights an essential way that aged ones can exert an influence for good on fellow servants of Jehovah . 
 Despite limitations imposed by health or other circumstances , those advanced in years can pray in behalf of others . 
 Older ones , do you appreciate just how much your prayers benefit the congregation ? 
 Because of your faith in Christ’s shed blood , you enjoy an approved standing before Jehovah , and because of your record of endurance , your faith has acquired a “ tested quality . ” 
 Never forget : “ A righteous man’s supplication , when it is at work , has much force . ” ​ — James 5 : 16 . 
 Your prayers in support of Jehovah’s Kingdom work are needed . 
 Some of our brothers are in prison on account of their Christian neutrality . 
 Others have fallen victim to natural disasters , wars , and civil strife . 
 Still others , right in our own congregations , are facing temptations or opposition . 
 Those taking the lead in the preaching work and in overseeing congregations also need your regular prayers in their behalf . 
 How good it is that you mention fellow believers in your prayers , as Epaphras did ! ​ — Colossians 4 : 12 . 
 Teaching the Generation to Come 
 16 , 17 . 
 What was foretold at Psalm 71 : 18 , and how has this come true ? 
 Association with faithful ones of the “ little flock , ” those with the heavenly calling , has provided essential training for those of the “ other sheep , ” who have the hope of living forever on earth . 
 This was foretold at Psalm 71 : 18 , which reads : “ Even until old age and gray - headedness , O God , do not leave me , until I may tell about your arm to the generation , to all those who are to come , about your mightiness . ” 
 Spirit - anointed ones have been eager to train their other sheep companions for increased responsibilities before leaving them to be glorified along with Jesus Christ . 
 In principle , what Psalm 71 : 18 says about instructing “ those who are to come ” could also be applied to the other sheep , who have received instruction from God’s anointed ones . 
 Jehovah has entrusted older ones with the privilege of testifying about him to those who are now embracing true worship . 
 The other sheep feel blessed for what they have learned from anointed ones and are impelled to share their Scriptural education with still others who desire to serve Jehovah . ​ — Revelation 7 : 9 , 10 . 
 18 , 19 . ( a ) What precious information can many older servants of Jehovah impart ? 
 ( b ) Of what should elderly Christians be confident ? 
 Older servants of Jehovah , both anointed ones and those of the other sheep , are a living link to important historical events . 
 A few still living were on hand for the original showings of the “ Photo - Drama of Creation . ” 
 Some personally knew the brothers taking the lead who were imprisoned in 1918 . 
 Others participated in broadcasts on the Watchtower radio station , WBBR . 
 Many can tell about the time when cases involving the religious freedom of Jehovah’s Witnesses were fought in the highest courts . 
 Still others stood firm for true worship while living under dictatorial regimes . 
 Yes , older ones can relate how the understanding of truth has been progressively revealed . 
 The Bible encourages us to benefit from this wealth of experience . ​ — Deuteronomy 32 : 7 . 
 Elderly Christians are urged to be good examples to the younger ones . 
 Perhaps now you do not see the effect that your endurance , prayers , and counsel has on others . 
 Noah , Abraham , Joseph , Moses , and others could not possibly have known the full impact of their faithfulness on the generations to come . 
 Yet , their legacy of faith and integrity mattered greatly ; so does yours . 
 What blessings await those who maintain their hope firm to the end ? 
 Whether you are preserved through the “ great tribulation ” or you are brought back by resurrection , what a delight it will be to experience “ the real life ” ! 
 Imagine the time during the Thousand Year Reign of Christ when Jehovah will reverse the effects of old age . 
 Rather than experiencing relentless deterioration of our bodies , we will awaken each day to progressive physical improvements ​ — more energy , sharper vision , keener hearing , better looks ! 
 Those who are blessed to live in God’s new world will always be young in comparison with the eternity yet to be experienced . 
 May all of us , therefore , maintain our hope firm to the end and continue to serve Jehovah whole - souled . 
 We can be confident that Jehovah will fulfill all that he has promised and that what he will do will far exceed any expectations we may have . ​ — Psalm 37 : 4 ; 145 : 16 . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • How did the steadfastness of aged Noah result in blessings for all mankind ? 
 • What effect did the faith of the patriarchs have on their descendants ? 
 • In their advanced years , how did Joseph , Moses , Joshua , and Samuel strengthen fellow worshippers ? 
 • What legacy can older ones pass on ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 Abraham’s endurance had a powerful effect on Isaac 
 [ Picture on page 28 ] 
 Moses ’ mature counsel encouraged Joshua 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 Your prayers in behalf of others can accomplish much good 
 [ Picture on page 30 ] 
 Young people benefit by listening to faithful older ones 
 We Are “ Wonderfully Made ” 
 “ In a fear - inspiring way I am wonderfully made . ” ​ — PSALM 139 : 14 . 
 Why do many thinking people credit God for earth’s wonders ? 
 THE natural world is filled with wonderful creations . 
 How did they come to be ? 
 Some believe that the answer can be found without referring to an intelligent Creator . 
 Others hold that arbitrarily ruling out a Creator limits our ability to understand nature . 
 They believe that earth’s creatures are far too complex , too varied and , you might say , too wonderful to have originated by chance . 
 To many people , some scientists included , the evidence shows that the universe had a wise , powerful , and benevolent Maker . 
 * 
 What moved David to praise Jehovah ? 
 King David of ancient Israel was one who was convinced that a Maker deserves praise for His wonderful creations . 
 Although David lived long before today’s scientific era , he perceived that he was surrounded by marvelous examples of God’s creative work . 
 David needed only to consider his own makeup to be profoundly awed by God’s creative ability . 
 “ I shall laud you because in a fear - inspiring way I am wonderfully made , ” he wrote . 
 “ Your works are wonderful , as my soul is very well aware . ” ​ — Psalm 139 : 14 . 
 3 , 4 . 
 Why is it important for each of us to think seriously about Jehovah’s works ? 
 David gained this strong conviction by thinking seriously . 
 Today , school curriculums and the media are replete with faith - destroying theories about man’s origin . 
 For us to have faith like that of David , we too must think seriously . 
 We cannot afford to let others think for us , especially on such fundamental issues as the existence and role of a Creator . 
 Moreover , contemplating Jehovah’s works strengthens our appreciation for him and gives us confidence in his promises for the future . 
 That , in turn , can motivate us to get to know Jehovah even better and to serve him . 
 Let us therefore consider how modern science has confirmed David’s conclusion that we are “ wonderfully made . ” 
 Our Marvelous Physical Development 
 5 , 6 . ( a ) How did all of us begin life ? 
 ( b ) What role do our kidneys play ? 
 “ You yourself produced my kidneys ; you kept me screened off in the belly of my mother . ” 
 All of us began our existence inside our mother’s body as a single cell smaller than the period at the end of this sentence . 
 That microscopic cell was extremely complex ​ — a miniature chemical laboratory ! 
 It grew rapidly . 
 By the end of your second month in the womb , your major organs were already formed . 
 Among them were your kidneys . 
 When you were born , your kidneys were ready to filter your blood supply ​ — removing toxins and excess water but retaining useful substances . 
 Your two kidneys , if healthy , filter the water in your blood ​ — about five quarts [ 6 L ] in an adult — ​ every 45 minutes ! 
 Your kidneys also help control the mineral content of your blood as well as its acidity and pressure . 
 They perform many other vital functions , such as converting vitamin D to an active form necessary for proper bone development and producing the hormone erythropoietin , which stimulates red blood cell production in your bones . 
 No wonder the kidneys have been called “ the master chemists of the body ” ! 
 * 
 7 , 8 . ( a ) Describe an unborn baby’s early growth . ( b ) In what way is a developing baby “ woven in the lowest parts of the earth ” ? 
 “ My bones were not hidden from you when I was made in secret , when I was woven in the lowest parts of the earth . ” 
 The original cell divided , and the new cells continued to divide . 
 Soon the cells began to differentiate , or specialize , to become nerve cells , muscle cells , skin cells , and so forth . 
 Cells of the same type grouped together to form tissues and then organs . 
 For instance , during the third week from conception , you began to develop a skeletal system . 
 By the time you were just seven weeks old and only about an inch [ 2.5 cm ] long , early forms of all 206 of your adult bones were in place , although they had not yet ossified , or turned into hard bone . 
 This amazing developmental process took place within your mother’s womb , hidden from human sight as if buried deep in the earth . 
 Indeed , much about how we develop remains unknown to man . 
 What , for example , activated specific genes in your cells to set in motion the process of differentiation ? 
 Science may eventually find out , but as David next observed , our Maker ​ — Jehovah — ​ has fully understood it all along . 
 9 , 10 . 
 How is the formation of an embryo’s parts “ down in writing ” in God’s “ book ” ? 
 “ Your eyes saw even the embryo of me , and in your book all its parts were down in writing , as regards the days when they were formed and there was not yet one among them . ” 
 Your first cell contained the complete plan for your entire body . 
 This plan guided your development during your nine months in the womb before birth and then through more than two decades of growth to adulthood . 
 During this time , your body passed through many stages , all directed by the information programmed into that original cell . 
 David had no knowledge of cells and genes , being without even a microscope . 
 But he correctly discerned that the development of his own body attested to advance planning . 
 David may have had some knowledge of how embryos develop , so he could reason that each step must take place according to a preexisting design and timetable . 
 In poetic language , he described this design as being “ down in writing ” in God’s “ book . ” 
 How did we come to have our physical characteristics ? 
 Today , it is known that characteristics you inherited from your parents and forebears ​ — such as your height , facial features , eye and hair color , and thousands of other traits — ​ were determined by your genes . 
 Each of your cells contains tens of thousands of genes , and each gene is part of a long chain made of DNA ( deoxyribonucleic acid ) . 
 Building instructions for your body are “ written ” in the chemical structure of your personal DNA . 
 Every time your cells divide ​ — to make new cells or to replace old cells — ​ your DNA passes those instructions on , thereby keeping you alive and maintaining your basic appearance . 
 What an outstanding example of the power and wisdom of our heavenly Maker ! 
 Our Unique Mind 
 What especially sets humans apart from animals ? 
 “ So , to me how precious your thoughts are ! 
 O God , how much does the grand sum of them amount to ! 
 Were I to try to count them , they are more than even the grains of sand . ” 
 Animals too are wonderfully made , and some possess certain senses and abilities that exceed those of humans . 
 But God gave humans mental faculties that far surpass those of any animal . 
 “ As similar as we humans are in many ways to other species , we are unique among the earth’s life forms in our ability to use language and thought , ” notes one science textbook . 
 “ We are also unique in our profound curiosity about ourselves : How are we put together physically ? 
 How were we formed ? ” 
 These are questions that David likewise pondered . 
 ( a ) How could David meditate on God’s thoughts ? 
 ( b ) How can we follow David’s example ? 
 Most important , in contrast with animals , we are unique in our ability to contemplate God’s thoughts . 
 * This special gift is one of the ways that we are made “ in God’s image . ” 
 David made good use of this gift . 
 He meditated on the evidence of God’s existence and the good qualities reflected in the earth around him . 
 David also had the early books of the Holy Scriptures , which contain revelations by God about himself and his works . 
 These inspired writings helped David to understand God’s thoughts , personality , and purpose . 
 Meditating on the Scriptures , on creation , and on God’s dealings with him moved David to praise his Maker . 
 What Faith Involves 
 Why do we not need to know everything about God in order to have faith in him ? 
 The more David contemplated creation and the Scriptures , the more he realized that comprehending the full range of God’s knowledge and ability was beyond his grasp . 
 The same is true of us . 
 We will never understand everything about all of God’s creative works . 
 But God has ‘ made manifest ’ enough knowledge through the Scriptures and in nature to enable truth - seekers living in any era to acquire faith that is based on evidence . ​ — Romans 1 : 19 , 20 ; Hebrews 11 : 1 , 3 . 
 Illustrate how faith and our relationship with God are linked . 
 Having faith involves more than merely acknowledging that life and the universe must have had an intelligent Source . 
 It includes trusting in Jehovah God as a person ​ — a person who wants us to get to know him and to maintain a good relationship with him . 
 We might think of the faith and trust one has in a loving father . 
 If a skeptic questioned whether your father would really help you in a crisis , you might not be able to convince him that your father is trustworthy . 
 If through experience you have accumulated evidence of your father’s good character , however , you can be confident that he will not let you down . 
 Similarly , coming to know Jehovah by studying the Scriptures , contemplating creation , and experiencing his help in answer to our prayers moves us to trust in him . 
 It makes us want to learn ever more about him and to praise him forever out of unselfish love and devotion . 
 That is the most noble purpose that anyone can pursue . ​ — Ephesians 5 : 1 , 2 . 
 Seek Our Maker’s Guidance ! 
 What can we learn from David’s close relationship with Jehovah ? 
 “ Search through me , O God , and know my heart . 
 Examine me , and know my disquieting thoughts , and see whether there is in me any painful way , and lead me in the way of time indefinite . ” 
 David was aware that Jehovah already knew him thoroughly ​ — everything that he thought , said , or did was within the scope of his Maker’s view . 
 Such intimate knowledge on God’s part made David feel secure , just as a small child feels secure in the arms of his loving parents . 
 David cherished this close relationship with Jehovah and strove to maintain it by thinking deeply about His works and by praying to Him . 
 In fact , many of David’s psalms ​ — including Psalm 139 — ​ are essentially prayers set to music . 
 Meditation and prayer can likewise help us to draw close to Jehovah . 
 ( a ) Why did David want Jehovah to examine his heart ? 
 ( b ) How does the way we exercise our free will affect our lives ? 
 Being made in God’s image , we are endowed with free will . 
 We can choose to do good or to do bad . 
 With that freedom comes moral accountability . 
 David did not want to be classed with the wicked . 
 He wanted to avoid making painful mistakes . 
 Thus , upon contemplating Jehovah’s all - encompassing knowledge , David humbly asked God to examine his innermost person and to guide him in the way that leads to life . 
 God’s righteous moral standards apply to everyone ; so we too need to make right choices . 
 Jehovah urges all of us to obey him . 
 Doing so brings us his favor and many benefits . 
 Walking with Jehovah day by day helps us to cultivate inner calm , even in the face of grievous problems . ​ — Philippians 4 : 6 , 7 . 
 Follow Our Wonderful Maker ! 
 What did David conclude from his contemplation of creation ? 
 As a youth , David was often outside , shepherding the flocks . 
 The sheep lowered their heads to graze , but he raised his eyes to the heavens . 
 In the evening darkness , David reflected on the grandeur of the universe and what it all meant . 
 “ The heavens are declaring the glory of God ; and of the work of his hands the expanse is telling , ” David wrote . 
 “ One day after another day causes speech to bubble forth , and one night after another night shows forth knowledge . ” 
 David understood that he needed to search for and follow the One who had made all things so wonderfully . 
 We need to do likewise . 
 What lessons can young and old draw from being “ wonderfully made ” ? 
 David exemplified the counsel that his son Solomon later offered to young people : “ Remember , now , your Grand Creator in the days of your young manhood . . . 
 Fear the true God and keep his commandments . 
 For this is the whole obligation of man . ” 
 As a youth , David already discerned that he was “ wonderfully made . ” 
 Acting on this insight brought him great benefits throughout his life . 
 If we , young and old , praise and serve our Grand Creator , our present and future life will be delightful . 
 Regarding those who stay close to Jehovah and live by his righteous ways , the Bible promises : “ They will still keep on thriving during gray - headedness , fat and fresh they will continue to be , to tell that Jehovah is upright . ” 
 And we will have the hope of enjoying our Maker’s wonderful works forever . 
 [ Footnotes ] 
 See the June 22 , 2004 , issue of Awake ! 
 published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 See also “ Your Kidneys ​ — A Filter for Life , ” in the August 8 , 1997 , issue of Awake ! 
 The words of David at Psalm 139 : 18b seem to mean that if he spent all day until he fell asleep at night counting Jehovah’s thoughts , upon awakening in the morning , he would still have more to count . 
 Can You Explain ? 
 • How does the way an embryo develops show that we are “ wonderfully made ” ? 
 • Why should we meditate on Jehovah’s thoughts ? 
 • How are faith and our relationship with Jehovah linked ? 
 [ Pictures on page 23 ] 
 A baby’s development in the womb follows a predetermined design 
 DNA 
 [ Credit Line ] 
 Unborn fetus : Lennart Nilsson 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 Like children who trust a loving father , we have confidence in Jehovah 
 [ Picture on page 25 ] 
 Pondering Jehovah’s handiwork moved David to praise Him 
 “ Return Evil for Evil to No One ” 
 “ Return evil for evil to no one . 
 Provide fine things in the sight of all men . ” ​ — ROMANS 12 : 17 . 
 What type of behavior is not uncommon ? 
 WHEN a child is shoved by a sibling , usually the child’s first reaction is to shove back . 
 Sadly , such tit - for - tat behavior is not limited to children . 
 Many adults act similarly . 
 When offended by someone , they want to get even . 
 Granted , most adults will not give a literal shove , but many will push back in subtle ways . 
 Perhaps they spread harmful gossip about the offender or find ways to prevent him from succeeding . 
 Whatever method is used , the intent is the same ​ — to repay in kind , to retaliate . 
 ( a ) Why do true Christians resist the urge to retaliate ? 
 ( b ) What questions and which Bible chapter will we consider ? 
 Although the urge to get even is deep - seated , true Christians resist giving in to it . 
 Instead , they strive to follow the apostle Paul’s admonition : “ Return evil for evil to no one . ” 
 What will motivate us to live according to that high standard ? 
 Whom in particular should we not repay with evil ? 
 What benefits will be reaped if we refrain from getting even ? 
 To answer those questions , let us study the context of Paul’s words and see how Romans chapter 12 shows that refraining from retaliation is the right , the loving , and the modest course to follow . 
 We will consider these three aspects , one at a time . 
 “ Consequently I Entreat You ” 
 3 , 4 . ( a ) Beginning with Romans chapter 12 , what does Paul discuss , and what is the significance of his use of the word “ consequently ” ? 
 ( b ) What effect should God’s compassion have had on the Christians in Rome ? 
 Beginning in chapter 12 , Paul considers four related subjects that affect a Christian’s life . 
 He describes our relationship with Jehovah , with fellow believers , with nonbelievers , and with governmental authorities . 
 Paul indicates that there is a fundamental reason to resist wrong inclinations , including the urge to retaliate , when he states : “ Consequently I entreat you by the compassions of God , brothers . ” 
 Note the word “ consequently , ” which means “ in view of the foregoing . ” 
 Paul in effect says , ‘ In view of what I just explained to you , I entreat you to do what I will tell you next . ’ 
 What had Paul explained to those Christians in Rome ? 
 In the first 11 chapters of his letter , Paul discussed the wonderful opportunity open to both Jews and Gentiles to become rulers with Christ in God’s Kingdom , a hope that natural Israel failed to accept . 
 That precious privilege became possible only “ by the compassions of God . ” 
 How should Christians respond to this great undeserved kindness on God’s part ? 
 Their hearts should be filled with such deeply felt gratitude that they would be moved to do what Paul states next : “ Present your bodies a sacrifice living , holy , acceptable to God , a sacred service with your power of reason . ” 
 How , though , could those Christians actually present themselves “ a sacrifice ” to God ? 
 ( a ) How can a person offer himself “ a sacrifice ” to God ? 
 ( b ) What principle should influence a Christian’s behavior ? 
 Paul goes on to explain : “ Quit being fashioned after this system of things , but be transformed by making your mind over , that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God . ” 
 Instead of allowing the spirit of the world to shape their thinking , they needed to make their minds over to Christ’s way of thinking . 
 That principle should influence the day - to - day behavior of all genuine Christians , including us today . 
 Based on Paul’s reasoning found at Romans 12 : 1 , 2 , what moves us to avoid retaliating ? 
 How does Paul’s reasoning at Romans 12 : 1 , 2 help us ? 
 Like those spirit - anointed Christians in Rome , we are deeply grateful for the continuing and manifold expressions of compassion that God has given us and continues to give us every day of our life . 
 Consequently , a heart filled with gratitude moves us to serve God with all our strength , means , and abilities . 
 That heartfelt desire also moves us to do our utmost to think , not like the world , but like Christ . 
 And having the mind of Christ affects how we treat others ​ — both fellow believers and nonbelievers . 
 A case in point : If we think like Christ , we are compelled to resist the urge to retaliate . ​ — 1 Peter 2 : 21 - 23 . 
 “ Let Your Love Be Without Hypocrisy ” 
 What type of love is considered in Romans chapter 12 ? 
 We refrain from returning evil for evil not only because it is the right course but also because it is the loving course . 
 Note how the apostle Paul next considers the motive of love . 
 In the book of Romans , Paul uses the word “ love ” ( a·gaʹpe in Greek ) several times when referring to God’s love and that of Christ . 
 However , in chapter 12 , Paul uses a·gaʹpe in a different way ​ — in speaking about love shown to fellow humans . 
 After noting that spiritual gifts vary and are present among some believers , Paul mentions a quality that should be cultivated by all Christians . 
 He states : “ Let your love be without hypocrisy . ” 
 Showing love to others is a basic mark of true Christians . 
 Paul exhorts us to make sure that the love we show as Christians is sincere . 
 How can we show unhypocritical love ? 
 Further , Paul notes how love without hypocrisy is shown , stating : “ Abhor what is wicked , cling to what is good . ” 
 “ Abhor ” and “ cling ” are strong words . 
 “ Abhor ” can be translated “ hate exceedingly . ” 
 We must hate not merely the consequences of evil but also the evil itself . 
 The word “ cling ” is a translation of a Greek verb that literally means “ to glue . ” 
 A Christian who has genuine love is so firmly glued , or attached , to the quality of goodness that it becomes an inseparable part of his personality . 
 What admonition does Paul give again and again ? 
 One particular manifestation of love is mentioned by Paul again and again . 
 He states : “ Keep on blessing those who persecute ; be blessing and do not be cursing . ” 
 “ Return evil for evil to no one . ” 
 “ Do not avenge yourselves , beloved . ” 
 “ Do not let yourself be conquered by the evil , but keep conquering the evil with the good . ” 
 Paul’s words leave no doubt about how we should treat nonbelievers , even those who oppose us . 
 “ Keep On Blessing Those Who Persecute ” 
 In what way can we bless our persecutors ? 
 How do we carry out Paul’s exhortation : “ Keep on blessing those who persecute ” ? 
 Jesus told his followers : “ Continue to love your enemies and to pray for those persecuting you . ” 
 Hence , one way in which we bless persecutors is by praying for them , petitioning God that if any are opposing us because of ignorance , Jehovah may open their eyes to the truth . 
 Granted , it may seem strange to ask God to bless a persecutor . 
 However , the more our mind - set resembles Christ’s way of thinking , the more we will be able to extend love to our enemies . 
 What can be the result of showing such love ? 
 ( a ) What can we learn from the example of Stephen ? 
 ( b ) As illustrated by Paul’s life , what change may occur in some persecutors ? 
 Stephen was one who prayed for his persecutors , and his prayer was not in vain . 
 Not long after Pentecost 33 C.E . , Stephen was arrested by opposers of the Christian congregation , dragged outside Jerusalem , and stoned . 
 Before he died , he cried out : “ Jehovah , do not charge this sin against them . ” 
 One of the men for whom Stephen prayed that day was Saul , who witnessed and approved of Stephen’s murder . 
 Later , the resurrected Jesus appeared to Saul . 
 That former persecutor became a follower of Christ and went on to become the apostle Paul , the writer of the letter to the Romans . 
 In line with Stephen’s prayer , Jehovah evidently forgave Paul for the sin of being a persecutor . 
 No wonder that Paul exhorted Christians : “ Keep on blessing those who persecute ” ! 
 He knew from experience that some persecutors may eventually become servants of God . 
 In our day , some persecutors have likewise become believers because of the peaceable conduct of Jehovah’s servants . 
 “ Be Peaceable With All Men ” 
 How are the words of admonition found at Romans 12 : 9 , 17 related ? 
 Paul’s next admonition on how to treat believers and unbelievers is : “ Return evil for evil to no one . ” 
 That statement is a logical consequence of what he said earlier , namely : “ Abhor what is wicked . ” 
 After all , how could a person say that he truly abhors what is wicked , or evil , if he were to use evil as a means to repay others ? 
 Doing so would be the opposite of having love “ without hypocrisy . ” 
 Then Paul says : “ Provide fine things in the sight of all men . ” 
 How do we apply those words ? 
 In what way do we conduct ourselves “ in the sight of all men ” ? 
 Earlier , in his letter to the Corinthians , Paul wrote about the persecution that the apostles faced . 
 He said : “ We have become a theatrical spectacle to the world , and to angels , and to men . . . . 
 When being reviled , we bless ; when being persecuted , we bear up ; when being defamed , we entreat . ” 
 Similarly , true Christians today are being watched by the people of this world . 
 When those around us observe the fine things we do even while we are being treated unjustly , they may be inclined to look more favorably upon our Christian message . ​ — 1 Peter 2 : 12 . 
 How far should we go in order to make peace ? 
 How far , though , should we go in order to promote peace ? 
 We should go as far as possible . 
 Paul tells his Christian brothers : “ If possible , as far as it depends upon you , be peaceable with all men . ” 
 “ If possible ” and “ as far as it depends upon you ” are qualifying expressions indicating that making peace with others may not always be possible . 
 For instance , we will not disobey a command of God just to keep peace with man . 
 Still , we do everything we reasonably can ​ — without compromising righteous principles — ​ to make peace “ with all men . ” 
 “ Do Not Avenge Yourselves ” 
 What reason to forgo retaliation is found at Romans 12 : 19 ? 
 Paul gives another compelling reason why we should not retaliate ; it is the modest course to follow . 
 He states : “ Do not avenge yourselves , beloved , but yield place to the wrath ; for it is written : ‘ Vengeance is mine ; I will repay , says Jehovah . ’ ” 
 A Christian who tries to take revenge is presumptuous . 
 He claims for himself a role that belongs to God . 
 Moreover , by taking matters into his own hands , he shows a lack of faith in Jehovah’s assurance : “ I will repay . ” 
 In contrast , true Christians trust that Jehovah will “ cause justice to be done for his chosen ones . ” 
 They modestly leave the avenging of wrong in God’s hands . ​ — Jeremiah 30 : 23 , 24 ; Romans 1 : 18 . 
 16 , 17 . ( a ) What does it mean to “ heap fiery coals ” upon someone’s head ? 
 ( b ) Have you personally observed how kindness softened the heart of an unbeliever ? 
 If so , give an example . 
 Taking vengeance on an enemy would likely harden his spirit , but treating him with kindness may soften his heart . 
 Why ? 
 Note Paul’s words to the Christians in Rome . 
 He says : “ If your enemy is hungry , feed him ; if he is thirsty , give him something to drink ; for by doing this you will heap fiery coals upon his head . ” 
 What does this mean ? 
 To “ heap fiery coals upon his head ” is a figure of speech drawn from the method of smelting metals in Bible times . 
 Ore was put into a furnace , and a layer of coals was put not only underneath the ore but also on top of it . 
 Fiery coals heaped on top increased the heat so that the hard metal melted and separated from the impurities in the ore . 
 Similarly , by doing kind deeds to an opposer , we may “ melt ” his hardness and bring out his better qualities . 
 In fact , numerous members of the Christian congregation were first attracted to true worship by the kind deeds that Jehovah’s servants performed in their behalf . 
 Why We Do Not Retaliate 
 Why is it right , loving , and modest not to retaliate ? 
 In this brief consideration of Romans chapter 12 , we have seen several important reasons why we “ return evil for evil to no one . ” 
 First , holding back from retaliating is the right course to follow . 
 In view of God’s compassion shown toward us , it is right and reasonable that we offer ourselves to Jehovah and willingly obey his commandments ​ — including the command to love our enemies . 
 Second , refusing to return evil for evil is the loving course to follow . 
 By forgoing retaliation and promoting peace , we lovingly hope to help even some fierce opposers to become worshippers of Jehovah . 
 Third , refraining from repaying with evil is the modest course to follow . 
 Avenging ourselves would be presumptuous , for Jehovah states : “ Vengeance is mine . ” 
 God’s Word also warns : “ Has presumptuousness come ? 
 Then dishonor will come ; but wisdom is with the modest ones . ” 
 Wisely leaving the avenging of wrong in God’s hands shows modesty on our part . 
 What will we consider in the following article ? 
 Paul sums up his discussion of how we should treat others . 
 He exhorts Christians : “ Do not let yourself be conquered by the evil , but keep conquering the evil with the good . ” 
 What evil forces are we facing today ? 
 How can we conquer them ? 
 The answers to these and related questions will be considered in the following article . 
 Can You Explain ? 
 • In Romans chapter 12 , what admonition is found again and again ? 
 • What will motivate us not to retaliate ? 
 • What benefits will be reaped by us and others if we do not “ return evil for evil ” ? 
 [ Box on page 22 ] 
 Romans chapter 12 describes a Christian’s relationship with 
 • Jehovah 
 • fellow believers 
 • unbelievers 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 Paul’s letter to the Romans provides Christians with practical counsel 
 [ Picture on page 25 ] 
 What can we learn from the example of the disciple Stephen ? 
 “ Keep Conquering the Evil With the Good ” 
 “ Do not let yourself be conquered by the evil , but keep conquering the evil with the good . ” ​ — ROMANS 12 : 21 . 
 Why can we be sure that we can conquer evil ? 
 IS IT possible to stand firm against those who fiercely oppose true worship ? 
 Is it possible to defeat the forces that try to pull us back into the ungodly world ? 
 The answer to both questions is yes ! 
 Why do we say so ? 
 Because of what the apostle Paul states in his letter to the Romans . 
 He writes : “ Do not let yourself be conquered by the evil , but keep conquering the evil with the good . ” 
 If we trust in Jehovah and are determined not to let the world conquer us , its evil will not overcome us . 
 Further , the expression “ keep conquering the evil ” shows that we can defeat evil if we keep up our spiritual fight against it . 
 Only those who let their guard down and cease fighting will be overcome by this wicked world and its evil ruler , Satan the Devil . ​ — 1 John 5 : 19 . 
 Why will we consider some events in the life of Nehemiah ? 
 Some 500 years before Paul’s time , a servant of God living in Jerusalem demonstrated the truth of Paul’s words about the fight against evil . 
 That man of God , Nehemiah , not only withstood opposition from ungodly people but also conquered evil with good . 
 What challenges did he face ? 
 What enabled him to succeed ? 
 How can we imitate his example ? 
 To answer those questions , let us consider some events in the life of Nehemiah . 
 * 
 In what environment did Nehemiah live , and what feat did he accomplish ? 
 Nehemiah served at the court of King Artaxerxes of Persia . 
 Although Nehemiah lived among unbelievers , he did not become “ fashioned after ” the “ system of things ” of those days . 
 When a need arose in Judah , he sacrificed his comfortable lifestyle , made the arduous journey to Jerusalem , and took on the huge task of rebuilding the city wall . 
 Even though he was governor of Jerusalem , Nehemiah daily toiled alongside his fellow Israelites “ from the ascending of the dawn until the stars came out . ” 
 As a result , within only two months , the project was completed ! 
 That was an amazing feat , for during the construction work , the Israelites faced various forms of opposition . 
 Who were Nehemiah’s opposers , and what was their goal ? 
 What was the goal of Nehemiah’s opposers ? 
 The main opposers were Sanballat , Tobiah , and Geshem , influential men living near Judah . 
 Since they were enemies of God’s people , “ it seemed to them something very bad that [ Nehemiah ] had come to seek something good for the sons of Israel . ” 
 Nehemiah’s enemies were bent on stopping Nehemiah’s building plans , even resorting to evil schemes . 
 Would Nehemiah ‘ let himself be conquered by evil ’ ? 
 “ Angry and Highly Offended ” 
 5 , 6 . ( a ) How did Nehemiah’s enemies react to the building work ? 
 ( b ) Why was Nehemiah not intimidated by opposers ? 
 Nehemiah courageously exhorted his people : “ Let us rebuild the wall of Jerusalem . ” 
 They replied : “ We must build . ” 
 Nehemiah notes : “ They strengthened their hands for the good work , ” but opposers “ began to deride us and look on us despisingly and say : ‘ What is this thing that you are doing ? 
 Is it against the king that you are rebelling ? ’ ” 
 Nehemiah was not intimidated by their taunts and false accusations . 
 He told the opposers : “ The God of the heavens is the One that will grant us success , and we ourselves , his servants , shall get up , and we must build . ” 
 Nehemiah was determined to push forward with “ the good work . ” 
 One of those opposers , Sanballat , “ became angry and highly offended ” and stepped up his verbal barrage . 
 “ What are the feeble Jews doing ? ” 
 he mocked . 
 “ Will they bring the stones to life out of the heaps of dusty rubbish ? ” 
 Tobiah joined in the jeering , saying : “ If a fox went up against it , he would certainly break down their wall of stones . ” 
 How did Nehemiah react ? 
 In what ways did Nehemiah react to the accusations of his opposers ? 
 Nehemiah simply ignored the mockery . 
 He followed God’s command and did not seek to retaliate . 
 Rather , he left the matter in Jehovah’s hands and prayed : “ Hear , O our God , for we have become an object of contempt ; and make their reproach return upon their own head . ” 
 Nehemiah trusted in Jehovah’s assurance : “ Vengeance is mine , and retribution . ” 
 Further , Nehemiah and his people “ kept building the wall . ” 
 They did not let themselves become sidetracked . 
 In fact , “ the entire wall came to be joined together clear to half its height , and the people continued to have a heart for working . ” 
 The enemies of true worship had failed to halt the building work ! 
 How can we imitate Nehemiah ? 
 ( a ) How might we imitate Nehemiah when opposers falsely accuse us ? 
 ( b ) Relate an experience you have had or heard about that shows the wisdom of not retaliating . 
 Today , opposers at school , at work , or even at home may hurl taunts and accusations at us . 
 However , often such false charges are best handled by applying the Scriptural principle : “ There is . . . a time to keep quiet . ” 
 Hence , like Nehemiah , we refrain from retaliating with cutting words . 
 We turn to God in prayer , trusting the one who assures us : “ I will repay . ” 
 In that way , we do not let our opposers sidetrack us from the spiritual work that is to be carried out today ​ — the preaching of the good news of God’s Kingdom and the making of disciples . 
 Each time we participate in the preaching work and refuse to be deterred by opposition , we show the same faithful spirit that Nehemiah did . 
 ‘ We Shall Certainly Kill You ’ 
 What form of opposition did Nehemiah’s enemies unleash , and how did Nehemiah respond ? 
 When opposers of true worship in Nehemiah’s time heard that “ the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem had gone forward , ” they took up their swords to “ fight against Jerusalem . ” 
 For the Jews the situation looked gloomy . 
 There were Samaritans in the north , Ammonites in the east , Arabs in the south , and Ashdodites in the west . 
 Jerusalem was surrounded ; the builders appeared to be trapped ! 
 What were they to do ? 
 “ We prayed to our God , ” says Nehemiah . 
 The enemies threatened : “ We shall certainly kill them and put a stop to the work . ” 
 Nehemiah responded by assigning the builders the task of defending the city “ with their swords , their lances and their bows . ” 
 True , humanly speaking , the small band of Jews did not stand a chance against the overwhelming enemy forces , but Nehemiah urged them : “ Do not be afraid . . . 
 Jehovah the great and the fear - inspiring One keep in your mind . ” ​ — Nehemiah 4 : 7 - 9 , 11 , 13 , 14 . 
 ( a ) What caused a sudden turn of events among Nehemiah’s enemies ? 
 ( b ) What measures did Nehemiah take ? 
 Now there was a sudden turn of events . 
 The enemies called off the attack . 
 Why ? 
 “ The true God had frustrated their counsel , ” reports Nehemiah . 
 However , Nehemiah realized that the enemies remained a threat . 
 Therefore , he prudently adjusted the work method of the builders . 
 From then on , “ each one was active in the work with his one hand while the other hand was holding the missile . ” 
 Nehemiah also assigned a man who in case of an enemy attack would “ blow the horn ” to warn the builders . 
 Above all , Nehemiah reassured the people : “ Our God himself will fight for us . ” 
 Encouraged and prepared to deal with aggression , the builders kept working . 
 What lessons can we draw from this account ? 
 What enables true Christians to withstand evil in lands where the Kingdom work is banned , and how do they conquer evil with good ? 
 At times , true Christians face violent opposition . 
 In fact , in some lands vicious opposers of true worship form an overwhelming enemy force . 
 Humanly speaking , our fellow believers in those lands do not stand a chance . 
 Nevertheless , those Witnesses are confident that ‘ God will fight for them . ’ 
 Indeed , those who are persecuted for their beliefs have time and again experienced that Jehovah answers their prayers and ‘ frustrates the counsel ’ of powerful enemies . 
 Even in countries where the Kingdom work is banned , Christians find ways to keep on preaching the good news . 
 Just as the builders in Jerusalem adjusted their work method , so Jehovah’s Witnesses today prudently adjust their preaching methods when under attack . 
 Of course , they refrain from using physical weapons . 
 Even the threat of physical violence does not make them halt their preaching activities . 
 On the contrary , those courageous brothers and sisters “ keep conquering the evil with the good . ” 
 “ Come , and Let Us Meet ” 
 12 , 13 . ( a ) What strategy did Nehemiah’s opposers employ ? 
 ( b ) Why did Nehemiah turn down the invitation to meet his opposers ? 
 After Nehemiah’s enemies realized that their open assaults had failed , they turned to more subtle forms of opposition . 
 In fact , they tried three schemes . 
 What were they ? 
 First , Nehemiah’s enemies tried to deceive him . 
 They told him : “ Come , and let us meet together by appointment in the villages of the valley plain of Ono . ” 
 Ono lay between Jerusalem and Samaria . 
 So the enemies proposed that Nehemiah meet them halfway to resolve the differences . 
 Nehemiah could have thought : ‘ That sounds reasonable . 
 It is better to talk than to fight . ’ 
 But Nehemiah refused . 
 He explained why : “ They were scheming to do me harm . ” 
 He saw through their scheme and was not deceived . 
 Four times he told his opposers : “ I am not able to go down . 
 Why should the work cease while I take off from it and have to go down to you ? ” 
 The enemies ’ attempts to get Nehemiah to compromise failed . 
 He kept his eye focused on the building work . ​ — Nehemiah 6 : 1 - 4 . 
 How did Nehemiah react to his false accusers ? 
 Second , Nehemiah’s enemies resorted to spreading false rumors , accusing Nehemiah of “ scheming to rebel ” against King Artaxerxes . 
 Once more , Nehemiah was told : “ Let us consult together . ” 
 Again Nehemiah refused , for he discerned the enemies ’ intention . 
 Nehemiah explained : “ All of them were trying to make us afraid , saying : ‘ Their hands will drop down from the work so that it will not be done . ’ ” 
 This time , however , Nehemiah did rebut his enemies ’ accusation , stating : “ Things such as you are saying have not been brought about , but it is out of your own heart that you are inventing them . ” 
 Moreover , Nehemiah turned to Jehovah for support , praying : “ Strengthen my hands . ” 
 He trusted that with Jehovah’s help , he would be able to foil this evil plot and push forward with the building project . ​ — Nehemiah 6 : 5 - 9 . 
 What recommendation did a false prophet make , and why did Nehemiah not accept the recommendation ? 
 Third , Nehemiah’s enemies used a traitor , the Israelite Shemaiah , to try to make Nehemiah break God’s Law . 
 Shemaiah said to Nehemiah : “ Let us meet by appointment at the house of the true God , within the temple , and let us close the doors of the temple ; for they are coming in to kill you . ” 
 Shemaiah said that Nehemiah was about to be assassinated but that he could save his life by hiding in the temple . 
 However , Nehemiah was not a priest . 
 He would commit a sin by hiding in the house of God . 
 Would he break God’s Law in an attempt to save his life ? 
 Nehemiah responded : “ Who is there like me that could enter into the temple and live ? 
 I shall not enter ! ” 
 Why did Nehemiah not fall into the trap that had been set for him ? 
 Because he knew that although Shemaiah was a fellow Israelite , “ it was not God that had sent him . ” 
 After all , a true prophet would never advise him to break God’s Law . 
 Again , Nehemiah did not let himself be conquered by evil opposers . 
 Shortly thereafter he could report : “ At length the wall came to completion on the twenty - fifth day of Elul , in fifty - two days . ” ​ — Nehemiah 6 : 10 - 15 ; Numbers 1 : 51 ; 18 : 7 . 
 ( a ) How should we deal with false friends , false accusers , and false brothers ? 
 ( b ) How do you show that you refuse to compromise your beliefs at home , at school , or at work ? 
 Like Nehemiah , we too might face opposers in the form of false friends , false accusers , and false brothers . 
 Some individuals may invite us to meet them halfway , so to speak . 
 They may try to convince us that if we serve Jehovah with a little less zeal , we could pursue worldly goals at the same time . 
 However , because God’s Kingdom comes first in our lives , we refuse to compromise . 
 Opposers also spread false accusations against us . 
 In some lands we are accused of posing a threat to the State , just as Nehemiah was accused of rebelling against the king . 
 Some accusations have been successfully rebutted in judicial courts . 
 But whatever the outcome in individual situations , we confidently pray that Jehovah will direct matters according to his will . 
 Opposition may also come from those who pretend to serve Jehovah . 
 Just as a fellow Jew tried to persuade Nehemiah to break God’s Law to save his life , so apostate former Witnesses may try to influence us to compromise in one way or another . 
 However , we reject apostates because we know that our lives are saved , not by breaking God’s laws , but by keeping them ! 
 Yes , with Jehovah’s help we can conquer any form of evil . 
 Sharing Good News Despite Facing Evil 
 17 , 18 . ( a ) What do Satan and his agents endeavor to achieve ? 
 ( b ) What are you determined to do , and why ? 
 God’s Word states regarding Christ’s anointed brothers : “ They conquered [ Satan ] because . . . of the word of their witnessing . ” 
 Hence , there is a direct connection between conquering Satan ​ — the source of evil — ​ and preaching the Kingdom message . 
 No wonder that Satan relentlessly attacks both the anointed remnant and the “ great crowd ” by stirring up opposition ! ​ — Revelation 7 : 9 ; 12 : 17 . 
 As we have seen , opposition may come in the form of verbal attacks or threats of physical violence or in more subtle forms . 
 In any case , Satan’s goal is always the same ​ — to put a stop to the preaching work . 
 However , he will fail miserably because in imitation of Nehemiah of old , God’s people are determined to “ keep conquering the evil with the good . ” 
 They will do so by keeping up the preaching of the good news until Jehovah says that the work is done ! ​ — Mark 13 : 10 ; Romans 8 : 31 ; Philippians 1 : 27 , 28 . 
 [ Footnote ] 
 For the background of those events , read Nehemiah 1 : 1 - 4 ; 2 : 1 - 6 , 9 - 20 ; 4 : 1 - 23 ; 6 : 1 - 15 . 
 Do You Recall ? 
 • What opposition was faced by God’s servants in the past and is faced by Christians today ? 
 • What was the main objective of Nehemiah’s enemies , and what is the objective of God’s enemies today ? 
 • How do we today keep on conquering evil with good ? 
 [ Box / ​ Picture on page 29 ] 
 Lessons Found in the Book of Nehemiah 
 Servants of God face 
 • ridicule 
 • threats 
 • deception 
 Deception is employed by 
 • false friends 
 • false accusers 
 • false brothers 
 God’s servants conquer evil by 
 • sticking to their God - given task 
 [ Picture on page 27 ] 
 Nehemiah and his fellow workers rebuilt the wall of Jerusalem despite fierce opposition 
 [ Picture on page 31 ] 
 True Christians fearlessly preach the good news 
 Have You Sinned Against the Holy Spirit ? 
 “ There is a sin that does incur death . ” ​ — 1 JOHN 5 : 16 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 How do we know that it is possible to sin against God’s holy spirit ? 
 “ I HAVE been obsessed with the thought that I have sinned against the holy spirit . ” 
 So wrote a woman in Germany , although she was serving God . 
 Can a Christian actually sin against God’s holy spirit , or active force ? 
 Yes , it is possible to sin against Jehovah’s holy spirit . 
 “ Every sort of sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men , ” said Jesus Christ , “ but the blasphemy against the spirit will not be forgiven . ” 
 We are warned : “ If we practice sin willfully after having received the accurate knowledge of the truth , there is no longer any sacrifice for sins left , but there is a certain fearful expectation of judgment . ” 
 And the apostle John wrote : “ There is a sin that does incur death . ” 
 But is it left to the one who has sinned seriously to determine whether he has committed “ a sin that does incur death ” ? 
 Repentance Brings Forgiveness 
 What is likely true if we are deeply grieved over a sin we have committed ? 
 Jehovah is the final Judge of wrongdoers . 
 Indeed , all of us must render an account to him , and he always does what is right . 
 Jehovah determines whether we have committed an unforgivable sin , and he can withdraw his spirit from us . 
 However , if we are deeply grieved over a sin we have committed , it is very likely that we are truly repentant . 
 What , though , is genuine repentance ? 
 ( a ) How would you define repentance ? 
 ( b ) What is so comforting about Psalm 103 : 10 - 14 ? 
 To repent means that we change our attitude toward past or intended wrongdoing . 
 It means that we feel sorrow or regret and turn away from a sinful course . 
 If we have sinned seriously but have taken the necessary steps to show that we have really repented , we can draw comfort from the psalmist’s words : “ He [ Jehovah ] has not done to us even according to our sins ; nor according to our errors has he brought upon us what we deserve . 
 For as the heavens are higher than the earth , his loving - kindness is superior toward those fearing him . 
 As far off as the sunrise is from the sunset , so far off from us he has put our transgressions . 
 As a father shows mercy to his sons , Jehovah has shown mercy to those fearing him . 
 For he himself well knows the formation of us , remembering that we are dust . ” ​ — Psalm 103 : 10 - 14 . 
 5 , 6 . 
 Give the substance of 1 John 3 : 19 - 22 , and explain the meaning of the apostle’s words . 
 Comforting , too , are the apostle John’s words : “ By this we shall know that we originate with the truth , and we shall assure our hearts before him as regards whatever our hearts may condemn us in , because God is greater than our hearts and knows all things . 
 Beloved ones , if our hearts do not condemn us , we have freeness of speech toward God ; and whatever we ask we receive from him , because we are observing his commandments and are doing the things that are pleasing in his eyes . ” ​ — 1 John 3 : 19 - 22 . 
 We “ know that we originate with the truth ” by the fact that we display brotherly love and do not make a practice of sinning . 
 If we feel condemned for some reason , we do well to remember that “ God is greater than our hearts and knows all things . ” 
 Jehovah shows us mercy because he is aware of our “ unhypocritical brotherly affection , ” our battle against sin , and our efforts to do his will . 
 Our heart will “ not condemn us ” if we trust in Jehovah , display brotherly love , and are not guilty of practicing deliberate sin . 
 We will have “ freeness of speech toward God ” in prayer , and he will answer us because we observe his commandments . 
 They Sinned Against the Spirit 
 What determines whether a sin is forgivable or not ? 
 What sins are not forgiven ? 
 To answer this question , let us consider some Biblical examples . 
 This should prove comforting to us if we are repentant but are still sorely distressed over our serious errors . 
 We will see that it is not so much a matter of what kind of sin a person has committed ; rather , it is the motive , the heart condition , and the degree of willfulness involved that determines whether a sin is forgivable or not . 
 How did some first - century Jewish religious leaders sin against the holy spirit ? 
 First - century Jewish religious leaders who maliciously opposed Jesus Christ were sinning against the holy spirit . 
 They saw God’s spirit at work in Jesus as he performed miracles that honored Jehovah . 
 Yet , these enemies of Christ attributed this power to Satan the Devil . 
 According to Jesus , those who thus blasphemed against God’s holy spirit were thereby committing a sin that would not be forgiven in the present “ system of things nor in that to come . ” ​ — Matthew 12 : 22 - 32 . 
 What is blasphemy , and what did Jesus say about it ? 
 Blasphemy is defamatory , injurious , or abusive speech . 
 Since the holy spirit has God as its Source , saying things against his spirit is the same as speaking against Jehovah . 
 Unrepentantly resorting to speech of that kind is unforgivable . 
 Jesus ’ words about such sin show that Jesus is referring to those who willfully oppose the operation of God’s holy spirit . 
 Because Jehovah’s spirit was at work in Jesus but his opposers ascribed this power to the Devil , they sinfully blasphemed against the spirit . 
 Hence , Jesus declared : “ Whoever blasphemes against the holy spirit has no forgiveness forever , but is guilty of everlasting sin . ” ​ — Mark 3 : 20 - 29 . 
 Why did Jesus call Judas “ the son of destruction ” ? 
 Consider also the case of Judas Iscariot . 
 He pursued a dishonest course , stealing from the money box entrusted to his care . 
 Judas later went to the Jewish rulers and arranged to betray Jesus for 30 pieces of silver . 
 Yes , Judas felt remorse after the betrayal , but he never repented of his deliberate sin . 
 Consequently , Judas is not worthy of a resurrection . 
 Jesus therefore called him “ the son of destruction . ” ​ — John 17 : 12 ; Matthew 26 : 14 - 16 . 
 They Did Not Sin Against the Spirit 
 11 - 13 . 
 How did King David sin in connection with Bath - sheba , and what comfort may be drawn from the way God dealt with them ? 
 Occasionally , Christians who have confessed their serious sin and who have received spiritual help from congregation elders may still be plagued by concern over past transgressions of God’s law . 
 If we are personally troubled in this way , very likely we will benefit from considering what the Scriptures say about those whose sins were forgiven . 
 King David sinned gravely in connection with Bath - sheba , the wife of Uriah . 
 Having seen this beautiful woman bathing as he looked down from his nearby rooftop , David had her brought to his palace and had sexual relations with her . 
 Later informed that she was pregnant , he schemed to have her husband , Uriah , sleep with her to cover up the adultery . 
 When that plot failed , the king arranged for Uriah to be killed in battle . 
 Thereafter , Bath - sheba became David’s wife and bore him a child who died . ​ — 2 Samuel 11 : 1 - 27 . 
 Jehovah handled matters involving David and Bath - sheba . 
 God forgave David , apparently taking into account such factors as his repentance and the Kingdom covenant made with him . 
 Bath - sheba evidently had a repentant attitude , for she was privileged to become the mother of King Solomon and an ancestress of Jesus Christ . 
 If we have sinned , it is good to remember that Jehovah takes note of our repentant attitude . 
 How is the extent of God’s forgiveness illustrated in King Manasseh’s case ? 
 The extent of Jehovah’s forgiveness is also illustrated in the case of King Manasseh of Judah . 
 He did what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes . 
 Manasseh set up altars to Baal , worshipped “ all the army of the heavens , ” and even built altars to false gods in two temple courtyards . 
 He made his sons pass through the fire , encouraged spiritistic practices , and caused the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem “ to do worse than the nations that Jehovah had annihilated from before the sons of Israel . ” 
 The warnings delivered by God’s prophets were not heeded . 
 Eventually , the king of Assyria took Manasseh captive . 
 While in captivity , Manasseh repented and humbly kept praying to God , who forgave him and restored him to the kingship in Jerusalem , where he promoted true worship . ​ — 2 Chronicles 33 : 2 - 17 . 
 What incident in the apostle Peter’s life shows that Jehovah forgives “ in a large way ” ? 
 Centuries later , the apostle Peter sinned grievously by denying Jesus . 
 However , Jehovah forgave Peter “ in a large way . ” 
 Why ? 
 Because Peter was genuinely repentant . 
 There was clear evidence of God’s forgiveness when on the day of Pentecost , Peter was privileged to give a bold witness about Jesus . 
 Is there any reason to believe that God would be less forgiving toward truly repentant Christians today ? 
 “ If errors were what you watch , O Jah , O Jehovah , who could stand ? ” 
 sang the psalmist , “ for there is the true forgiveness with you . ” ​ — Psalm 130 : 3 , 4 . 
 Allaying Fear About Sin 
 Under what circumstances does God grant forgiveness ? 
 The foregoing examples should help to allay our anxiety about having sinned against the holy spirit . 
 They show that Jehovah does forgive repentant sinners . 
 Of prime importance is earnest prayer to God . 
 If we have sinned , we can plead for forgiveness on the basis of Jesus ’ ransom sacrifice , Jehovah’s mercy , our inherited imperfection , and our record of faithful service . 
 Knowing Jehovah’s undeserved kindness , we can seek forgiveness , confident that it will be granted . ​ — Ephesians 1 : 7 . 
 What should be done if we have sinned and need spiritual help ? 
 What if we have sinned but are unable to pray because our sin has made us spiritually sick ? 
 In this regard , the disciple James wrote : “ Let [ such a person ] call the older men of the congregation to him , and let them pray over him , greasing him with oil in the name of Jehovah . 
 And the prayer of faith will make the indisposed one well , and Jehovah will raise him up . 
 Also , if he has committed sins , it will be forgiven him . ” ​ — James 5 : 14 , 15 . 
 Why is a person’s sin not necessarily unforgivable even if he is expelled from the congregation ? 
 Even if a wrongdoer is at the time unrepentant and he is expelled from the congregation , his sin is not necessarily unforgivable . 
 Concerning a disfellowshipped anointed wrongdoer in Corinth , Paul wrote : “ This rebuke given by the majority is sufficient for such a man , so that , on the contrary now , you should kindly forgive and comfort him , that somehow such a man may not be swallowed up by his being overly sad . ” 
 To be restored spiritually , however , erring ones need to accept the Bible - based spiritual help of Christian elders and give evidence of true repentance . 
 They must “ produce fruits that befit repentance . ” ​ — Luke 3 : 8 . 
 What can help us to remain “ healthy in faith ” ? 
 What might contribute to the feeling that we have sinned against the holy spirit ? 
 Overconscientiousness or a weak physical condition may be factors . 
 In such a case , prayer and added rest may be helpful . 
 Especially should we not let Satan discourage us , so that we stop serving God . 
 Since Jehovah has no pleasure in the death of the wicked , he surely takes no delight in the loss of any of his servants . 
 So if we fear that we have sinned against the spirit , we should continue feeding on God’s Word , including such comforting portions as the Psalms . 
 We need to keep on attending congregation meetings and sharing in the Kingdom - preaching work . 
 Doing so will help us to be “ healthy in faith ” and free from anxiety over the possibility of having committed the unforgivable sin . ​ — Titus 2 : 2 . 
 What reasoning may help a person to see that he has not sinned against the holy spirit ? 
 Any who fear that they have sinned against the holy spirit might ask themselves : ‘ Have I blasphemed against the holy spirit ? 
 Did I genuinely repent of my sin ? 
 Do I have faith in God’s forgiveness ? 
 Am I an apostate who has rejected spiritual light ? ’ 
 Very likely , such individuals will realize that they have not blasphemed against God’s holy spirit , nor have they become apostates . 
 They are repentant , and they have abiding faith in Jehovah’s forgiveness . 
 If so , they have not sinned against Jehovah’s holy spirit . 
 The next article will deal with what questions ? 
 What a blessing it is to be certain that we have not sinned against the holy spirit ! 
 Related to this matter , however , are questions to be considered in the next article . 
 For instance , we might ask ourselves : ‘ Am I really being led by God’s holy spirit ? 
 Is its fruitage evident in my life ? ’ 
 What Is Your Reply ? 
 • Why can we say that it is possible to sin against the holy spirit ? 
 • What does it mean to repent ? 
 • Who sinned against the spirit when Jesus was on earth ? 
 • How can anxiety about having committed an unforgivable sin be overcome ? 
 [ Picture on page 17 ] 
 Those who said that Jesus performed miracles with Satan’s power sinned against God’s holy spirit 
 [ Picture on page 18 ] 
 Although he denied Jesus , Peter did not commit an unforgivable sin 
 Awaiting Jehovah’s Day With Endurance 
 “ Supply to your faith . . . endurance . ” ​ — 2 PETER 1 : 5 , 6 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What is endurance , and why do Christians need it ? 
 JEHOVAH’S great day is very near . 
 As Christians determined to maintain our integrity to God , we eagerly await that time when Jehovah’s sovereignty will be vindicated . 
 Meanwhile , we face hatred , reproach , persecution , and death for our faith . 
 This calls for endurance ​ — the ability to withstand adversity . 
 The apostle Peter urges us : “ Supply to your faith . . . endurance . ” 
 We need endurance , for Jesus said : “ He that has endured to the end is the one that will be saved . ” ​ — Matthew 24 : 13 . 
 We also experience illness , bereavement , and other trials . 
 How pleased Satan would be if our faith were to give out ! 
 With Jehovah’s support , we can endure various trials . 
 Consider some real - life experiences that prove that we can wait for Jehovah’s day with endurance and undiminished faith . 
 Illness Has Not Stopped Them 
 3 , 4 . 
 Give an example to show that we can serve Jehovah faithfully despite illness . 
 God does not now cure us miraculously , but he does give us the fortitude to endure illness . 
 “ For as long as I can recall , ” said Sharon , “ the wheelchair has been my constant companion . 
 From birth on , cerebral palsy robbed me of childhood joys . ” 
 Learning about Jehovah and his promises of perfect health gave Sharon hope . 
 Although she speaks and walks with difficulty , she finds joy in the Christian ministry . 
 Some 15 years ago , she said : “ My health may continue to fail , but my trust in God and my relationship with him are my lifelines . 
 How happy I am to be among Jehovah’s people and to have his unfailing support ! ” 
 The apostle Paul urged Christians in Thessalonica to “ speak consolingly to the depressed souls . ” 
 Such factors as grave disappointment can cause depression . 
 In 1993 , Sharon wrote : “ Feeling like an utter failure , I . . . plunged into a three - year period of deep depression . . . . 
 Comfort and counsel came from the elders . . . . 
 Through The Watchtower , Jehovah tenderly provided insight into severe depression . 
 Yes , he does care for his people and understands our feelings . ” 
 Sharon is still serving God faithfully as she awaits Jehovah’s great day . 
 What proof is there that Christians can endure considerable stress ? 
 Some Christians suffer considerable stress because of past experiences in life . 
 Harley saw heavy combat in World War II and had nightmares about warfare . 
 While asleep , he would scream : “ Watch out ! 
 Look out ! ” 
 Upon awakening , he would be soaking wet with perspiration . 
 However , he was able to pursue a godly life , and in time the intensity and frequency of such dreams diminished . 
 How did one Christian face emotional problems ? 
 One Christian diagnosed with bipolar disorder found it very difficult to preach from door to door . 
 He persisted , however , because he realized that the ministry means life for him and for those responding favorably . 
 Sometimes he could not bring himself to the point of ringing the doorbell , but he said : “ After a while , I would be able to bring my emotions under control , go to the next door , and try again . 
 By continuing to share in the ministry , I maintained reasonable spiritual health . ” 
 Attending meetings was also a challenge , but this brother was convinced of the value of spiritual association . 
 Therefore , he made the effort required to be present . ​ — Hebrews 10 : 24 , 25 . 
 Although some are afraid to speak in public or to attend a meeting , how do they show endurance ? 
 Some Christians have phobias ​ — excessive fears of certain situations or objects . 
 For instance , they may be afraid to speak in public or even to attend a meeting . 
 Imagine how hard it is for them to comment at Christian meetings or to give a talk in the Theocratic Ministry School ! 
 Yet , they are enduring , and we greatly appreciate their presence and participation . 
 What is especially effective when coping with emotional difficulties ? 
 More rest and sleep may help a person to endure emotional difficulties . 
 Medical help may be advisable . 
 Especially effective , however , is prayerful reliance on God . 
 “ Throw your burden upon Jehovah himself , and he himself will sustain you , ” says Psalm 55 : 22 . 
 “ Never will he allow the righteous one to totter . ” 
 By all means , then , “ trust in Jehovah with all your heart . ” ​ — Proverbs 3 : 5 , 6 . 
 Enduring Bereavement 
 9 - 11 . ( a ) What can help us to endure sorrow when a loved one dies ? 
 ( b ) How can Anna’s example help us to endure bereavement ? 
 When death separates family members , such great loss can result in deep sorrow . 
 Abraham wept over the death of his beloved wife , Sarah . 
 Even the perfect man Jesus “ gave way to tears ” when his friend Lazarus died . 
 So it is natural to experience sadness when death claims someone you love . 
 However , Christians know that there will be a resurrection . 
 Hence , they do not “ sorrow just as the rest also do who have no hope . ” ​ — 1 Thessalonians 4 : 13 . 
 How can we cope with bereavement ? 
 Perhaps an illustration will be helpful . 
 We do not usually experience prolonged sadness when a friend goes on a journey , since we expect to see him again when he returns . 
 Taking a similar view of the death of a faithful Christian may lessen our grief because we know that he is in line for a resurrection . ​ — Ecclesiastes 7 : 1 . 
 Complete reliance on “ the God of all comfort ” will help us to endure bereavement . 
 So will reflecting on what was done by the first - century widow Anna . 
 She became a widow after only seven years of marriage . 
 But at the age of 84 , she was still rendering sacred service to Jehovah at the temple . 
 Such a devout life undoubtedly helped her to cope with grief and loneliness . 
 Regular participation in Christian activities , including the Kingdom - preaching work , can help us to endure the effects of bereavement . 
 Dealing With Various Trials 
 Some Christians have endured what trial related to family life ? 
 Some Christians must endure trials related to family life . 
 For instance , if a mate commits adultery , what devastating effects that can have ! 
 Because of the shock and grief , the betrayed marriage partner may be unable to sleep and may weep uncontrollably . 
 Performing simple tasks may be so stressful that mistakes are made or accidents occur . 
 The innocent mate may be unable to eat , may lose weight , and may become emotionally troubled . 
 It may be difficult to engage in Christian activities . 
 And how greatly the children may be affected ! 
 13 , 14 . ( a ) What encouragement do you get from Solomon’s prayer at the inauguration of the temple ? 
 ( b ) Why do we pray for holy spirit ? 
 When we experience such trials , Jehovah provides the help we need . 
 God hears the prayers of his people , as shown in King Solomon’s prayer at the inauguration of Jehovah’s temple . 
 Solomon prayed to God : “ Whatever prayer , whatever request for favor there may occur on the part of any man or of all your people Israel , because they know each one the plague of his own heart , and they actually spread out their palms to this house , then may you yourself hear from the heavens , your established place of dwelling , and you must forgive and act and give to each one according to all his ways , because you know his heart ( for you yourself alone well know the heart of all the sons of mankind ) ; to the end that they may fear you all the days that they are alive upon the surface of the ground that you gave to our forefathers . ” ​ — 1 Kings 8 : 38 - 40 . 
 It can be especially helpful to keep on praying for holy spirit . 
 The fruitage of the spirit includes such qualities as joy and peace . 
 What relief is felt when our heavenly Father answers our prayers ​ — joy replaces grief , and peace takes the place of anguish ! 
 What scriptures can help to allay our anxiety ? 
 A certain amount of anxiety is to be expected when we must endure great stress . 
 But at least some of this concern may be allayed if we bear in mind these words of Jesus : “ Stop being anxious about your souls as to what you will eat or what you will drink , or about your bodies as to what you will wear . . . . 
 Keep on , then , seeking first the kingdom and [ God’s ] righteousness , and all these other things will be added to you . ” 
 The apostle Peter urges us to ‘ throw all our anxiety upon God , because he cares for us . ’ 
 It is proper to make efforts to solve a problem . 
 After we have done what we can , however , worry cannot take the place of prayer . 
 “ Roll upon Jehovah your way , and rely upon him , and he himself will act , ” sang the psalmist . ​ — Psalm 37 : 5 . 
 16 , 17 . ( a ) Why are we not entirely free of anxiety ? 
 ( b ) What will we experience if we apply Philippians 4 : 6 , 7 ? 
 Paul wrote : “ Do not be anxious over anything , but in everything by prayer and supplication along with thanksgiving let your petitions be made known to God ; and the peace of God that excels all thought will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus . ” 
 Naturally , imperfect descendants of Adam cannot be totally free of anxiety . 
 The Hittite wives of Esau “ were a source of bitterness of spirit ” to Esau’s godly parents , Isaac and Rebekah . 
 Illness must have caused anxiety for such Christians as Timothy and Trophimus . 
 Paul had anxiety for fellow believers . 
 But the “ Hearer of prayer ” is always there for those who love him . ​ — Psalm 65 : 2 . 
 As we await Jehovah’s day , we have support and comfort from “ the God of peace . ” 
 Jehovah is “ merciful and gracious , ” he is “ good and ready to forgive , ” and ‘ he remembers that we are dust . ’ 
 So let us ‘ make our petitions known to him , ’ for this will result in our having “ the peace of God ” ​ — tranquillity that surpasses human comprehension . 
 As noted at Job 42 : 5 , how is it possible to “ see ” God ? 
 When our prayers are answered , we know that God is with us . 
 After Job endured his trials , he said : “ In hearsay I have heard about you [ Jehovah ] , but now my own eye does see you . ” 
 With the eye of understanding , faith , and gratitude , we can reflect on God’s dealings with us and can “ see ” him as never before . 
 How such intimacy brings us peace of heart and mind ! 
 What will happen if we ‘ throw all our anxiety on Jehovah ’ ? 
 If we ‘ throw all our anxiety on Jehovah , ’ we can endure trials with an inner calm that guards our heart and mental powers . 
 Deep in our figurative heart , we will experience freedom from uneasiness , fear , and alarm . 
 Our mind will not be unsettled by perplexity or anxiety . 
 20 , 21 . ( a ) Stephen’s case provides what evidence of tranquillity when experiencing persecution ? 
 ( b ) Cite a modern - day example of calmness when enduring trials . 
 The disciple Stephen displayed tranquillity when enduring a severe test of his faith . 
 Before he gave a final witness , all those in the Sanhedrin “ saw that his face was as an angel’s face . ” 
 His countenance was tranquil ​ — like that of an angel , a messenger of God . 
 After Stephen exposed their guilt in Jesus ’ death , the judges “ felt cut to their hearts and began to gnash their teeth at him . ” 
 “ Full of holy spirit , ” Stephen “ gazed into heaven and caught sight of God’s glory and of Jesus standing at God’s right hand . ” 
 Strengthened by that vision , Stephen proved faithful to death . 
 Although we do not have visions , we can have God - given tranquillity when persecuted . 
 Consider the sentiments of certain Christians who suffered death at Nazi hands during World War II . 
 Relating his experience in court , one said : “ The death sentence was decreed . 
 I listened , and then after I had spoken the words , ‘ Be thou faithful unto death , ’ and a few other words of our Lord , it was all over . . . . 
 But never mind that now . 
 For I have such peace , such tranquillity , that you can’t possibly imagine ! ” 
 A young Christian facing death by beheading wrote his parents : “ It is already past midnight . 
 I still have time to change my mind . 
 Ah ! 
 could I be happy again in this world after I had denied our Lord ? 
 Surely not ! 
 But now you have the assurance that I leave this world in happiness and peace . ” 
 There is no doubt that Jehovah supports his loyal servants . 
 You Can Endure ! 
 22 , 23 . 
 Of what can you be sure as you await Jehovah’s day with endurance ? 
 You may not face certain challenges we have considered . 
 Yet , God - fearing Job was right when he said : “ Man , born of woman , is short - lived and glutted with agitation . ” 
 Perhaps you are a parent who is working hard to give your children spiritual guidance . 
 They must endure trials at school , but how happy you are when they take a firm stand for Jehovah and his righteous principles ! 
 Possibly you are experiencing hardships and temptations in the workplace . 
 These and other situations can be endured , however , because ‘ Jehovah daily carries the load for you . ’ ​ — Psalm 68 : 19 . 
 You may think of yourself as just an average person , but bear in mind that Jehovah will never forget your work and the love you show for his holy name . 
 With his help , you can endure tests of faith . 
 So keep the doing of God’s will in your prayers and plans . 
 Then you can be confident of divine blessing and support as you await Jehovah’s day with endurance . 
 How Would You Respond ? 
 • Why do Christians need endurance ? 
 • What can help us to endure illness and bereavement ? 
 • How does prayer help us to endure trials ? 
 • Why is it possible to await Jehovah’s day with endurance ? 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 Reliance on Jehovah enables us to endure bereavement 
 [ Picture on page 31 ] 
 Heartfelt prayer helps us to endure tests of faith 
 “ Guard Against Every Sort of Covetousness ” 
 “ Even when a person has an abundance his life does not result from the things he possesses . ” ​ — LUKE 12 : 15 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) What have you observed about people’s interests and pursuits today ? 
 ( b ) How may we be affected by such attitudes ? 
 MONEY , property , prestige , high - paying jobs , family ​ — these are among the things that most people look at as a gauge of success or as insurance for a secure future . 
 It is evident that in lands rich and poor , many people’s interests and pursuits are focused on material gains and advancement . 
 On the other hand , their interest in spiritual things ​ — if there is any — ​ is on a rapid decline . 
 This is just as the Bible foretold . 
 It says : “ In the last days critical times hard to deal with will be here . 
 For men will be lovers of themselves , lovers of money , . . . lovers of pleasures rather than lovers of God , having a form of godly devotion but proving false to its power . ” 
 Living among such people day in and day out , true Christians are under constant pressure to conform to this kind of mentality and lifestyle . 
 What can help us to resist the world’s efforts to ‘ squeeze us into its own mould ’ ? ​ — Romans 12 : 2 , The New Testament in Modern English , by J . 
 B . 
 Phillips . 
 What counsel provided by Jesus will we consider now ? 
 As “ the Chief Agent and Perfecter of our faith , ” Jesus Christ provided us with powerful lessons in this regard . 
 On one occasion when Jesus was speaking to the crowd on some spiritually enlightening matters , a man interrupted the discussion with a request : “ Teacher , tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me . ” 
 In response , Jesus provided the man ​ — and all those listening — ​ with some serious counsel . 
 He sounded a strong warning against covetousness and reinforced that warning with a thought - provoking illustration . 
 We do well to take heed of what Jesus said on that occasion and see how we can benefit by applying it in our own life . ​ — Luke 12 : 13 - 21 . 
 An Inappropriate Request 
 Why was the man’s interrupting Jesus inappropriate ? 
 Prior to the man’s interruption , Jesus was speaking to his disciples and others about being on guard against hypocrisy , about having the courage to confess union with the Son of man , and about receiving help from the holy spirit . 
 Surely these are vital subjects that the disciples needed to take to heart . 
 In the midst of such a soul - searching discourse , however , the man abruptly cut in and asked Jesus to arbitrate in what appeared to be a family squabble over material possessions . 
 Yet , there is an important lesson that we can learn from this event . 
 What did the man’s request reveal about him ? 
 It has been said that “ the character of a man is often indicated by the direction which his thoughts take when he is listening to a religious exhortation . ” 
 While Jesus was speaking about serious spiritual matters , the man was probably thinking about what he could do to achieve certain financial advantages . 
 Whether he had a legitimate cause for grievance in connection with the inheritance is not stated . 
 Perhaps he was trying to capitalize on Jesus ’ authority and reputation as a wise judge in human affairs . 
 In any case , his question suggested that deep down , there was a problem ​ — a serious lack of appreciation for spiritual matters . 
 Is this not good reason for us to examine ourselves ? 
 At Christian meetings , for example , it is easy to allow our mind to wander or to dwell on what we might do later . 
 Instead , we should pay attention to what is said and think of ways to make personal application of the information so that we can improve our relationship with our heavenly Father , Jehovah God , and with our fellow Christians . ​ — Psalm 22 : 22 ; Mark 4 : 24 . 
 Why did Jesus decline to act as the man requested ? 
 Whatever motivated the man to make the request , Jesus declined to act upon it . 
 Instead , Jesus said to him : “ Man , who appointed me judge or apportioner over you persons ? ” 
 In saying that , Jesus was referring to something that the people were well - aware of , for according to the Mosaic Law , judges in the cities were appointed to rule on just such matters . 
 Jesus , on the other hand , was concerned with more important things ​ — to bear witness to Kingdom truth and to teach people God’s will . 
 Following Jesus ’ example , rather than being sidetracked by mundane issues , we use our time and energy to preach the good news and to “ make disciples of people of all the nations . ” ​ — Matthew 24 : 14 ; 28 : 19 . 
 Beware of Covetousness 
 What penetrating observation did Jesus make ? 
 Being able to discern the deepest intentions of the heart , Jesus was aware that something more serious was involved in the man’s request for Jesus to intervene in a personal matter . 
 Thus , instead of simply turning down the request , Jesus got to the heart of the matter and said : “ Keep your eyes open and guard against every sort of covetousness , because even when a person has an abundance his life does not result from the things he possesses . ” ​ — Luke 12 : 15 . 
 What is covetousness , and what can it lead to ? 
 Covetousness is more than simply the desire to have money or certain things , which could have their proper use and purpose . 
 It is the “ inordinate desire for wealth or possessions or for another’s possessions , ” according to one dictionary . 
 It can involve the insatiable , greedy urge to have things ​ — perhaps those belonging to someone else — ​ simply for the sake of having them , without regard for one’s own needs or the effect on others . 
 A covetous person allows the object of his desire to dominate his thinking and actions to such an extent that it in essence becomes his god . 
 Recall that the apostle Paul equates a greedy person with an idolater , who has no share in God’s Kingdom . ​ — Ephesians 5 : 5 ; Colossians 3 : 5 . 
 In what ways can covetousness be manifested ? 
 Give some examples . 
 Interestingly , Jesus warned against “ every sort of covetousness . ” 
 Covetousness comes in many forms . 
 The last of the Ten Commandments enumerated some of them , stating : “ You must not desire your fellowman’s house . 
 You must not desire your fellowman’s wife , nor his slave man nor his slave girl nor his bull nor his ass nor anything that belongs to your fellowman . ” 
 The Bible is replete with examples of individuals who have fallen into grievous sin on account of covetousness of one kind or another . 
 Satan was the first to covet something that belonged to someone else ​ — the glory , honor , and authority that are Jehovah’s alone . 
 Eve coveted the right of self - determination , and her being deceived in this regard started the human race down the road to sin and death . 
 The demons were angels who became discontented with “ their original position but forsook their own proper dwelling place ” for something to which they were not entitled . 
 Think , too , of Balaam , Achan , Gehazi , and Judas . 
 Instead of being content with their lot in life , they allowed an inordinate desire for material possessions to cause them to misuse their trust , plunging them into ruin and destruction . 
 How should we ‘ keep our eyes open , ’ as Jesus admonished ? 
 How fitting that Jesus prefaced the warning against covetousness with the words “ keep your eyes open ” ! 
 Why ? 
 Because it is so easy for people to see that someone else is being greedy or covetous , but it is rare that they will acknowledge that they themselves are guilty of it . 
 Yet , the apostle Paul points out that “ the love of money is a root of all sorts of injurious things . ” 
 The disciple James explains that wrong desire , “ when it has become fertile , gives birth to sin . ” 
 In line with Jesus ’ admonition , we should ‘ keep our eyes open , ’ not to observe others to see if they fit the description , but to examine ourselves to see what we have set our hearts on , so as to “ guard against every sort of covetousness . ” 
 A Life of Abundance 
 11 , 12 . ( a ) What warning did Jesus give against covetousness ? 
 ( b ) Why do we need to heed Jesus ’ warning ? 
 There is yet another reason why we must guard against covetousness . 
 Note what Jesus next said : “ Even when a person has an abundance his life does not result from the things he possesses . ” 
 This certainly is food for thought in our materialistic age , when people equate affluence and prosperity with happiness and success . 
 By those words , Jesus was pointing out that a truly meaningful and satisfying life does not result from or depend on material possessions , no matter how abundant . 
 Some , however , may disagree . 
 They may reason that material possessions make life more comfortable and enjoyable , thus more worthwhile . 
 Hence , they devote themselves to pursuits that would give them the ability to acquire all the goods and gadgets that they desire . 
 This , they think , will result in a good life . 
 But in so thinking , they miss the point Jesus was making . 
 What is a balanced view of life and possessions ? 
 Instead of focusing on whether it is right or wrong to have an abundance , Jesus was making the point that a man’s life does not result from “ the things he possesses , ” that is , the things he already has . 
 In this regard , we all know that to live , or to sustain the life we have , does not really require very much . 
 It takes only a little food , something to wear , and a place to lie down . 
 The rich have an abundance of these things , and the poor may have to struggle to obtain what they need . 
 What difference there is , however , is equalized when life comes to its end ​ — everything comes to naught . 
 Thus , for life to have meaning and worth , it cannot and should not simply consist of things that one can acquire or possess . 
 This thought becomes evident when we examine what life Jesus was speaking about . 
 What can we learn from the word for “ life ” found in the Bible account ? 
 When Jesus said that “ life does not result from the things he possesses , ” the word used here for “ life ” in Luke’s Gospel ( Greek , zo·eʹ ) refers , not to the manner or style of living , but to life itself , life in the absolute sense . 
 * Jesus was saying that whether we are rich or poor , whether we live in luxury or we barely eke out an existence , we do not have complete control over how long we may live or whether we will even be alive tomorrow . 
 Jesus stated in his Sermon on the Mount : “ Who of you by being anxious can add one cubit to his life span ? ” 
 The Bible clearly shows that Jehovah alone is “ the source of life , ” and only he can grant faithful ones “ the real life , ” or “ everlasting life , ” life without end , either in heaven or on earth . ​ — Psalm 36 : 9 ; 1 Timothy 6 : 12 , 19 . 
 Why do many put their trust in material possessions ? 
 Jesus ’ words point out how easy it is for people to have a warped or distorted view of life . 
 Whether rich or poor , all humans are imperfect and have but one eventuality . 
 Moses of old observed : “ In themselves the days of our years are seventy years ; and if because of special mightiness they are eighty years , yet their insistence is on trouble and hurtful things ; for it must quickly pass by , and away we fly . ” 
 For this reason , people who have not cultivated a good relationship with God often adopt the “ let us eat and drink , for tomorrow we are to die ” mentality , referred to by the apostle Paul . 
 Others , sensing that life is fleeting and uncertain , try to find security and permanence in material possessions . 
 Perhaps they feel that having many physical , tangible material things will somehow make life more secure . 
 Thus , they labor incessantly to amass wealth and possessions , mistakenly equating such things with security and happiness . ​ — Psalm 49 : 6 , 11 , 12 . 
 A Secure Future 
 On what is true worth in life not based ? 
 It may be true that a higher living standard ​ — having an abundance of food , clothing , shelter , and other amenities — ​ could contribute to a more comfortable life or may even allow for better medical care and thus add a few years to a person’s life span . 
 However , is such a life really more meaningful and more secure ? 
 True worth in life is not measured in the number of years one might live or the amount of material things one might possess or enjoy . 
 The apostle Paul pointed to the danger of putting too much stock in such things . 
 To Timothy he wrote : “ Give orders to those who are rich in the present system of things not to be high - minded , and to rest their hope , not on uncertain riches , but on God , who furnishes us all things richly for our enjoyment . ” ​ — 1 Timothy 6 : 17 . 
 17 , 18 . ( a ) What outstanding examples with regard to material possessions are worthy of our imitation ? 
 ( b ) What parable of Jesus will be considered in the following article ? 
 To rest one’s hope on riches is unwise because they are “ uncertain . ” 
 The patriarch Job was very well - off , but when disaster struck suddenly , his riches could not help him ; they vanished overnight . 
 It was his solid relationship with God that preserved him through all the trials and tribulations . 
 Abraham did not allow his abundant material possessions to prevent him from accepting a challenging assignment from Jehovah , and he was blessed with becoming the “ father of a crowd of nations . ” 
 These and other examples are worthy of our imitation . 
 Young or old , we need to examine ourselves to see what is truly important in our life and on what we rest our hope . ​ — Ephesians 5 : 10 ; Philippians 1 : 10 . 
 The few words that Jesus spoke on covetousness and the proper view of life are meaningful and instructive indeed . 
 However , Jesus had something further in mind , and he went on to relate a thought - provoking parable , or illustration , about an unreasonable rich man . 
 How is that illustration pertinent to our life today , and what can we learn from it ? 
 The next article will provide the answers . 
 [ Footnote ] 
 Another Greek word translated “ life ” is biʹos , from which come such English words as “ biography ” and “ biology . ” 
 According to Vine’s Expository Dictionary of Old and New Testament Words , biʹos refers to “ the period or duration of life , ” “ the manner of life , ” and “ the means of life . ” 
 What Is Your Answer ? 
 • What can we learn from Jesus ’ refusal to act on the request by a man in the crowd ? 
 • Why must we guard against covetousness , and how can we do so ? 
 • Why does life not result from material possessions ? 
 • What can make life truly worthwhile and secure ? 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 Why did Jesus turn down one man’s request ? 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 Covetousness can lead to disastrous results 
 [ Pictures on page 25 ] 
 How did Abraham manifest a proper view of material possessions ? 
 Are You “ Rich Toward God ” ? 
 “ So it goes with the man that lays up treasure for himself but is not rich toward God . ” ​ — LUKE 12 : 21 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) For what have people been willing to make great sacrifices ? 
 ( b ) What challenge and danger must Christians face ? 
 TREASURE HUNTING is not just a game that children like to play ; it is also a real - life drama played out again and again in many ages and societies . 
 For example , the gold rush of the 19th century in Australia , South Africa , Canada , and the United States attracted people from far away who were willing to leave home and loved ones to seek fortunes in strange , sometimes hostile , lands . 
 Yes , many people are willing to take extreme risks and make enormous sacrifices in order to attain the riches that their hearts desire . 
 Though most people today are not taking part in a literal treasure hunt , they do have to work hard to make a living . 
 To do that in the present system of things can be challenging , demanding , and burdensome . 
 It is easy to become so concerned with food , clothing , and shelter that the more important things are neglected or even forgotten . 
 Jesus gave an illustration , or parable , that accurately delineated this human tendency . 
 It is found at Luke 12 : 16 - 21 . 
 Briefly relate Jesus ’ illustration recorded at Luke 12 : 16 - 21 . 
 Jesus ’ illustration was given on the same occasion that he spoke about the need to guard against covetousness , which we examined in some detail in the preceding article . 
 After warning about covetousness , Jesus spoke about a rich man who is not content with storehouses filled with good things he already has but who tears them down and builds bigger ones in order to lay up more good things . 
 Just as he thinks he is ready to relax and enjoy a good life , God tells him that his life is coming to an end and all the good things the man has stored up will go to someone else . 
 Then Jesus added the concluding statement : “ So it goes with the man that lays up treasure for himself but is not rich toward God . ” 
 What lesson can we learn from this parable ? 
 How can we apply the lesson to our own life ? 
 A Man With a Problem 
 What kind of man could we say was portrayed in Jesus ’ parable ? 
 The illustration that Jesus gave is a familiar one . 
 We note that Jesus introduced the story simply by saying : “ The land of a certain rich man produced well . ” 
 Jesus did not say that the man acquired his riches by some devious or unlawful means . 
 In other words , he was not portrayed as a bad man . 
 In fact , from what Jesus said , it is reasonable to think that the man portrayed in the parable had worked hard . 
 At least it can be understood that he was a man who planned and saved for the future , perhaps with the welfare of his family in mind . 
 Thus , from a secular point of view , he can be taken to represent a hardworking man who took his obligations seriously . 
 What problem confronts the man in Jesus ’ parable ? 
 In any case , Jesus did call the individual in the parable a rich man , meaning someone who already had in his possession an abundance of material goods . 
 However , as Jesus described it , the rich man had a problem . 
 His land produced much more than he expected , above and beyond what he needed or could care for . 
 What should he have done ? 
 What choices do many of God’s servants face today ? 
 Many of Jehovah’s servants today face situations very much like that of the rich man . 
 True Christians strive to be honest , diligent , and conscientious workers . 
 Whether they are employed or they have their own business , they often do well , even excel in what they do . 
 When promotions or new opportunities come along , they are confronted with a decision . 
 Should they move up or expand ? 
 Likewise , many Witness youths do well in school . 
 As a result , they may be offered awards or scholarships for advanced education at prestigious institutions . 
 Should they simply go along and accept what is offered ? 
 How did the man in Jesus ’ parable deal with his problem ? 
 Coming back to Jesus ’ illustration , what did the rich man do when his land produced so well that he had nowhere to store his harvest ? 
 He decided to tear down the storehouses that he had and build bigger ones to store all the excess grain and good things . 
 That plan apparently gave him such a sense of security and satisfaction that he thought to himself : “ I will say to my soul : ‘ Soul , you have many good things laid up for many years ; take your ease , eat , drink , enjoy yourself . ’ ” ​ — Luke 12 : 19 . 
 Why “ Unreasonable ” ? 
 What vital element did the man in Jesus ’ parable overlook ? 
 As Jesus presented it , however , the rich man’s plan provided only a false sense of security . 
 Practical as it might have seemed , it left out one vital element ​ — God’s will . 
 The man was only thinking about himself , how he would be able to take his ease and eat , drink , and enjoy himself . 
 He thought that because of having “ many good things , ” he would also have “ many years . ” 
 But too bad for him , things did not work out that way . 
 Just as Jesus said earlier , “ even when a person has an abundance his life does not result from the things he possesses . ” 
 That very night , everything the man had worked for came to an abrupt end , for God said to him : “ Unreasonable one , this night they are demanding your soul from you . 
 Who , then , is to have the things you stored up ? ” ​ — Luke 12 : 20 . 
 Why was the man in the parable called unreasonable ? 
 Here , we come to the central point of Jesus ’ illustration . 
 God called the man unreasonable . 
 The Exegetical Dictionary of the New Testament explains that forms of the Greek word used “ always signify a lack of understanding . ” 
 It observes that in this parable , God is represented as using the word to expose “ the meaninglessness of the future plans of the rich . ” 
 The word refers , not to one who lacks intelligence , but to “ one who refuses to acknowledge dependence on God . ” 
 Jesus ’ description of the rich man brings to mind what he later said to the Christians in the first - century congregation in Laodicea , Asia Minor : “ You say : ‘ I am rich and have acquired riches and do not need anything at all , ’ but you do not know you are miserable and pitiable and poor and blind and naked . ” ​ — Revelation 3 : 17 . 
 Why is the possession of “ many good things ” no guarantee of having “ many years ” ? 
 We do well to take the lesson to heart . 
 Could we be like the man in the parable ​ — work very hard to make sure that we would have “ many good things ” yet fail to do what is necessary to gain the prospect of having “ many years ” ? 
 The Bible says : “ Valuable things will be of no benefit on the day of fury , ” and “ the one trusting in his riches ​ — he himself will fall . ” 
 Therefore , Jesus added this final admonition to the parable : “ So it goes with the man that lays up treasure for himself but is not rich toward God . ” ​ — Luke 12 : 21 . 
 Why is it futile to build one’s hope and security on material possessions ? 
 When Jesus said “ so it goes , ” he was pointing out that what happened to the rich man in the illustration will also happen to those who build their life ​ — their hope and their security — ​ solely on material possessions . 
 The fault is not so much in ‘ laying up treasure for oneself ’ as it is in failing to be “ rich toward God . ” 
 The disciple James sounded a similar warning when he wrote : “ Come , now , you who say : ‘ Today or tomorrow we will journey to this city and will spend a year there , and we will engage in business and make profits , ’ whereas you do not know what your life will be tomorrow . ” 
 What should they do ? 
 “ Instead , you ought to say : ‘ If Jehovah wills , we shall live and also do this or that . ’ ” 
 No matter how rich a person may be or how many possessions he may have , all will prove to be futile unless he is rich toward God . 
 What , then , does it mean to be rich toward God ? 
 To Be Rich Toward God 
 Doing what will make us rich toward God ? 
 In Jesus ’ statement , being rich toward God is set in contrast with laying up material treasures for oneself , or enriching oneself materially . 
 Thus , Jesus was saying that our main concern in life should not be the accumulation of material riches or the enjoyment of what we may possess . 
 Instead , we should use our resources in such a way as to enrich , or build up , our relationship with Jehovah . 
 Doing so will surely make us rich toward God . 
 Why ? 
 Because it opens the door to many blessings from him . 
 The Bible tells us : “ The blessing of Jehovah ​ — that is what makes rich , and he adds no pain with it . ” ​ — Proverbs 10 : 22 . 
 How does Jehovah’s blessing ‘ make rich ’ ? 
 When Jehovah bestows blessings on his people , he always gives them the best . 
 For example , when Jehovah gave the Israelites a home , it was “ a land flowing with milk and honey . ” 
 Although the land of Egypt had also been described that way , the land that Jehovah gave the Israelites was different in at least one vital respect . 
 It was “ a land that Jehovah your God is caring for , ” Moses told the Israelites . 
 In other words , they would prosper because Jehovah would be looking after them . 
 As long as the Israelites remained faithful to Jehovah , they were richly blessed by him and enjoyed a way of life that was visibly superior to that of all the nations round about . 
 Yes , it is Jehovah’s blessing that “ makes rich ” ! ​ — Numbers 16 : 13 ; Deuteronomy 4 : 5 - 8 ; 11 : 8 - 15 . 
 What do those who are rich toward God enjoy ? 
 The expression “ rich toward God ” is also rendered “ rich in God’s sight ” ( Today’s English Version ) or “ rich in the eyes of God . ” 
 ( The New Testament in Modern English , by J . 
 B . 
 Phillips ) Those who are rich materially are generally concerned with how they might appear in the eyes of others . 
 This is often reflected in their way of life . 
 They want to impress people with what the Bible calls “ the showy display of one’s means of life . ” 
 In contrast , those who are rich toward God enjoy God’s approval , favor , and undeserved kindness in abundance and have a warm personal relationship with him . 
 Being in such a precious state surely gives them a sense of well - being and security , more than any material riches can provide . 
 The question that remains is , What must we do in order to be rich in God’s eyes ? 
 Rich in God’s Eyes 
 What must we do in order to be rich toward God ? 
 In Jesus ’ illustration , the man planned and worked hard only to enrich himself , and he was called unreasonable . 
 To be rich toward God , therefore , we must endeavor to work hard and have a full share in the activities that are truly valuable and worthwhile in God’s eyes . 
 Among these is what Jesus commanded : “ Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations . ” 
 Using our time , energy , and talents , not for self - advancement , but in the Kingdom - preaching and disciple - making work can be likened to making an investment . 
 Those who have done so have reaped rich dividends spiritually , as shown by the following experiences . ​ — Proverbs 19 : 17 . 
 16 , 17 . 
 What experiences can you relate to show the way of life that makes one rich in God’s eyes ? 
 Consider the case of a Christian man in a country in the Orient . 
 He had a well - paying job as a computer technician . 
 However , his work occupied practically all his time and left him feeling spiritually impoverished . 
 Finally , instead of trying to get ahead in his job , he quit and took up making ice cream and selling it on the street so that he would have more time to care for his spiritual needs and responsibilities . 
 Former workmates made fun of him , but how did things turn out ? 
 “ Actually , I was better off financially than when I worked with computers , ” he said . 
 “ It has made me happier because I do not have the stress and worry that I had with my former job . 
 And most important , I now feel closer to Jehovah . ” 
 The change enabled this Christian to enter the full - time ministry , and he is now serving at the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in his country . 
 Jehovah’s blessing indeed “ makes rich . ” 
 Another example is that of a woman who grew up in a family in which education was highly valued . 
 She attended universities in France , Mexico , and Switzerland and was headed for a promising career . 
 “ Success smiled upon me ; prestige and privilege accompanied me , ” she said , “ but on the inside , there was a void , a deep dissatisfaction . ” 
 Then she learned about Jehovah . 
 She said : “ As I progressed spiritually , my desire to please Jehovah and to return a little of what he had given me helped me to see clearly the road to take ​ — serve him full - time . ” 
 She resigned from her position and was soon baptized . 
 For the past 20 years , she has happily served in the full - time ministry . 
 “ Some think that I have wasted my talents , ” she relates , “ but they recognize that I am happy , and they admire the principles by which I live my life . 
 Every day I pray to Jehovah to help me to be humble so as to have his approval . ” 
 Like Paul , how can we be rich toward God ? 
 Saul , who became the apostle Paul , had a promising career ahead of him . 
 Yet , he later wrote : “ I do indeed also consider all things to be loss on account of the excelling value of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord . ” 
 To Paul , the riches he gained through Christ excelled anything that the world could offer . 
 Likewise , by relinquishing any selfish ambitions and pursuing a life of godly devotion , we too can enjoy a life that is rich in God’s eyes . 
 God’s Word assures us : “ The result of humility and the fear of Jehovah is riches and glory and life . ” ​ — Proverbs 22 : 4 . 
 Can You Explain ? 
 • What problem did the man in Jesus ’ illustration have ? 
 • Why was the man in the parable called unreasonable ? 
 • What does it mean to be rich toward God ? 
 • How can we become rich toward God ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 Why was the rich man called unreasonable ? 
 [ Picture on page 27 ] 
 How may opportunities for advancement become a real test ? 
 [ Picture on page 28 , 29 ] 
 “ The blessing of Jehovah ​ — that is what makes rich ” 
 Jehovah Is a Lover of Justice 
 “ I , Jehovah , am loving justice . ” ​ — ISAIAH 61 : 8 . 
 1 , 2 . ( a ) What do the words “ justice ” and “ injustice ” mean ? 
 ( b ) What does the Bible say about Jehovah and his quality of justice ? 
 JUSTICE is defined as ‘ the quality of being impartial , fair , acting in conformity with what is morally upright and good . ’ 
 Injustice involves being unfair , prejudiced , bad , inflicting undeserved harm on others . 
 Nearly 3,500 years ago , Moses wrote regarding the Universal Sovereign , Jehovah : “ All his ways are justice . 
 A God of faithfulness , with whom there is no injustice . ” 
 Over seven centuries later , God inspired Isaiah to record these words : “ I , Jehovah , am loving justice . ” 
 Then in the first century , Paul exclaimed : “ Is there injustice with God ? 
 Never may that become so ! ” 
 And in the same century , Peter declared : “ God is not partial , but in every nation the man that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him . ” 
 Yes , “ Jehovah is a lover of justice . ” ​ — Psalm 37 : 28 ; Malachi 3 : 6 . 
 Injustice Prevails 
 How did injustice on earth originate ? 
 Justice is not a prevailing quality today . 
 We can become victims of unjust acts at all levels of society ​ — at our place of work , in school , in our dealings with officials , and in other ways — ​ even in the family circle . 
 Of course , such injustices are not new . 
 They came upon the human family when our first parents rebelled and became lawless , spurred on by the rebellious spirit creature who became Satan the Devil . 
 It surely was unjust for Adam , Eve , and Satan to misuse the wonderful gift of free will that Jehovah had granted them . 
 Their wrong actions would result in enormous suffering and death for the entire human family . ​ — Genesis 3 : 1 - 6 ; Romans 5 : 12 ; Hebrews 2 : 14 . 
 For how long has injustice been part of human history ? 
 For some 6,000 years since the rebellion in Eden , injustice has been part of human society . 
 This could well be expected because Satan is the god of this world . 
 He is a liar and the father of the lie , a slanderer and a resister of Jehovah . 
 He has always perpetrated gross injustices . 
 For example , in part because of Satan’s evil influence before the Flood of Noah’s day , God noted that “ the badness of man was abundant in the earth and every inclination of the thoughts of his heart was only bad all the time . ” 
 That situation still prevailed in the time of Jesus . 
 He said : “ Sufficient for each day is its own badness , ” meaning its own distressing problems , such as injustice . 
 The Bible so accurately says : “ All creation keeps on groaning together and being in pain together until now . ” ​ — Romans 8 : 22 . 
 Why are there more injustices in our time than ever before ? 
 Thus , bad things resulting in gross injustices have been happening throughout human history . 
 Now the situation is worse than ever . 
 Why ? 
 Because this present ungodly system of things has been in its “ last days ” for many decades , experiencing “ critical times hard to deal with ” as it nears its end . 
 The Bible foretold that during this period in history , people would be “ lovers of themselves , lovers of money , self - assuming , haughty , blasphemers , . . . unthankful , disloyal , having no natural affection , not open to any agreement , slanderers , without self - control , fierce , without love of goodness , betrayers , headstrong , puffed up with pride . ” 
 Bad traits like those lead to injustices of all kinds . 
 6 , 7 . 
 What huge injustices have afflicted the human family in modern times ? 
 The past hundred years have seen injustices on a scale never before experienced . 
 For one thing , these years have been the most war - torn . 
 For example , some historians estimate that in World War II alone , the dead totaled from some 50 million to 60 million , the majority of whom were civilians ​ — innocent men , women , and children . 
 Since that war ended , millions more have been killed in various conflicts , the majority again being civilians . 
 Satan promotes such injustices because he is in a rage , knowing that soon Jehovah will totally defeat him . 
 Bible prophecy puts it this way : “ The Devil has come down to you , having great anger , knowing he has a short period of time . ” ​ — Revelation 12 : 12 . 
 Global military spending is now about a trillion dollars each year . 
 Hundreds of millions of people do not have the necessities of life , so think of the good all that money could do if spent on peaceful pursuits . 
 About one billion people do not have enough to eat , while others have an abundance . 
 According to a United Nations source , about five million children die from the effects of hunger each year . 
 How unjust ! 
 Then , too , consider the many innocents who are killed by abortions . 
 Estimates vary from 40 million to 60 million worldwide every year ! 
 What a horrendous injustice ! 
 How only can true justice for humankind come about ? 
 Human rulers are not finding solutions to the vast problems plaguing mankind today ; nor will the situation get better because of human efforts . 
 God’s Word foretold that in our time “ wicked men and impostors will advance from bad to worse , misleading and being misled . ” 
 Injustice is so much a part of the fabric of daily living that men cannot remove it . 
 Only the God of justice can remove it . 
 Only he can remove Satan , the demons , and evil humans . ​ — Jeremiah 10 : 23 , 24 . 
 Understandable Concern 
 9 , 10 . 
 Why did Asaph become disheartened ? 
 In the past , even some Bible writers wondered why God had not already intervened in human affairs and ushered in true justice and righteousness . 
 Take , for example , one particular man in Bible times . 
 The superscription to Psalm 73 provides the name Asaph , referring either to a prominent Levite musician during the reign of King David or to the musicians of the house of which Asaph was the paternal head . 
 Asaph and his descendants wrote many musical compositions that were used in public worship . 
 Yet , at one point in his life , the writer of this psalm became spiritually downhearted . 
 He saw the material prosperity of wicked men , and he noticed that they often seemed to be content with their life , not experiencing any adverse consequences . 
 We read : “ I became envious of the boasters , when I would see the very peace of wicked people . 
 For they have no deathly pangs ; and their paunch is fat . 
 They are not even in the trouble of mortal man , and they are not plagued the same as other men . ” 
 But in time that Bible writer came to realize that such a negative viewpoint was wrong . 
 The psalmist tried to adjust his thinking , but he could not fully comprehend why the wicked seemed to get away with doing wrong while rightly disposed people often suffered . 
 What did the psalmist Asaph come to understand ? 
 Eventually , that faithful man of old came to understand what was in store for the wicked ​ — that Jehovah would ultimately set matters straight . 
 David wrote : “ Hope in Jehovah and keep his way , and he will exalt you to take possession of the earth . 
 When the wicked ones are cut off , you will see it . ” ​ — Psalm 37 : 9 , 11 , 34 . 
 ( a ) What is Jehovah’s purpose concerning wickedness and injustice ? 
 ( b ) How do you feel about that solution to the problem of injustice ? 
 For a certainty , it is Jehovah’s purpose to eliminate wickedness and its accompanying injustices from this earth in his own due time . 
 That is something of which even loyal Christians should remind themselves regularly . 
 Jehovah is going to remove those who go contrary to his will , and he will reward those who live in harmony with it . 
 “ His own eyes behold , his own beaming eyes examine the sons of men . 
 Jehovah himself examines the righteous one as well as the wicked one , and anyone loving violence His soul certainly hates . 
 He will rain down upon the wicked ones traps , fire and sulphur and a scorching wind . . . 
 For Jehovah is righteous ; he does love righteous acts . ” ​ — Psalm 11 : 4 - 7 . 
 A New World of Justice 
 13 , 14 . 
 Why will righteousness and justice prevail in the new world ? 
 When Jehovah destroys this unjust system of things that is under Satan’s control , He will usher in a glorious new world . 
 It will be controlled by God’s heavenly Kingdom , for which Jesus taught his followers to pray . 
 Wickedness and injustice will be replaced by righteousness and justice , for then the prayer will be answered in the fullest sense : “ Let your kingdom come . 
 Let your will take place , as in heaven , also upon earth . ” ​ — Matthew 6 : 10 . 
 The Bible tells us what kind of rulership we can expect , rulership that all righthearted individuals now long for . 
 Psalm 145 : 16 will then find fulfillment in its completest sense : “ You [ Jehovah God ] are opening your hand and satisfying the desire of every living thing . ” 
 Moreover , Isaiah 32 : 1 says : “ Look ! 
 A king [ Christ Jesus in heaven ] will reign for righteousness itself ; and as respects princes [ Christ’s earthly representatives ] , they will rule as princes for justice itself . ” 
 Regarding the King Jesus Christ , Isaiah 9 : 7 foretells : “ To the abundance of the princely rule and to peace there will be no end , upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom in order to establish it firmly and to sustain it by means of justice and by means of righteousness , from now on and to time indefinite . 
 The very zeal of Jehovah of armies will do this . ” 
 Can you see yourself living under that just rulership ? 
 What will Jehovah do for humankind in the new world ? 
 In God’s new world , we will no longer have reason to express the words we find at Ecclesiastes 4 : 1 : “ I myself returned that I might see all the acts of oppression that are being done under the sun , and , look ! 
 the tears of those being oppressed , but they had no comforter ; and on the side of their oppressors there was power , so that they had no comforter . ” 
 Granted , with our imperfect minds , it is difficult to imagine just how wonderful that new world of righteousness will be . 
 Badness will no longer exist ; instead , every day will be filled with good things . 
 Yes , Jehovah will correct everything that is wrong , doing so in a way that is far beyond our expectations . 
 How appropriate that Jehovah God inspired the apostle Peter to write : “ There are new heavens and a new earth that we are awaiting according to his promise , and in these righteousness is to dwell ” ! ​ — 2 Peter 3 : 13 . 
 How has the “ new heavens ” been established , and in what sense is the “ new earth ” being prepared today ? 
 Indeed , the “ new heavens , ” God’s heavenly government in the hands of Christ , has been set in place already . 
 Those who will form the nucleus of the “ new earth , ” a new earthly society of rightly disposed people , are being gathered during these last days . 
 They are already nearly seven million strong , in at least 235 lands and in some 100,000 congregations . 
 These millions have been learning the righteous and just ways of Jehovah , and as a result , worldwide they enjoy a unity that is cemented by Christian love . 
 Their unity is the most pronounced and enduring in the history of the world , a unity exceeding anything experienced by Satan’s subjects . 
 Such love and unity are foregleams of the marvelous time to come in God’s new world , which will be governed in righteousness and justice . ​ — Isaiah 2 : 2 - 4 ; John 13 : 34 , 35 ; Colossians 3 : 14 . 
 Satan’s Attack to Fail 
 Why is Satan’s final attack on Jehovah’s people certain to fail ? 
 Satan and his followers will soon come against Jehovah’s worshippers in an attempt to stamp them out . 
 That will be part of what Jesus called the “ great tribulation such as has not occurred since the world’s beginning until now , no , nor will occur again . ” 
 Will Satan’s attack succeed ? 
 No . 
 God’s Word assures us : “ Jehovah is a lover of justice , and he will not leave his loyal ones . 
 To time indefinite they will certainly be guarded ; but as for the offspring of the wicked ones , they will indeed be cut off . 
 The righteous themselves will possess the earth , and they will reside forever upon it . ” ​ — Psalm 37 : 28 , 29 . 
 ( a ) How will God react to Satan’s coming attack on His people ? 
 ( b ) Why has it been good for you to review this Bible - based information about the triumph of justice ? 
 The attack by Satan and his horde on Jehovah’s servants will be the final insult . 
 Jehovah foretold through Zechariah : “ He that is touching you is touching my eyeball . ” 
 It is as if someone were thrusting a finger in Jehovah’s eyeball . 
 He will respond immediately and eliminate the perpetrators . 
 Jehovah’s servants are the most loving , united , peaceful , law - abiding people on earth . 
 So that attack against them will be totally unwarranted , unjust . 
 The great “ lover of justice ” will not tolerate it . 
 His acting in their behalf will result in the eternal destruction of the enemies of his people , in the triumph of justice , and in the salvation of those who worship the only true God . 
 What amazing , thrilling events are immediately ahead of us ! ​ — Proverbs 2 : 21 , 22 . 
 How Would You Answer ? 
 • Why is injustice so prevalent ? 
 • How will Jehovah solve the problem of injustice on earth ? 
 • What has touched you in this study about the triumph of justice ? 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 Badness was abundant before the Flood , and it abounds in these “ last days ” 
 [ Picture on page 24 , 25 ] 
 In God’s new world , justice and righteousness will replace wickedness 
 Parents ​ — Train Your Children With Love 
 “ Let all your affairs take place with love . ” ​ — 1 CORINTHIANS 16 : 14 . 
 What feelings do parents experience at the birth of a child ? 
 MOST would agree that the birth of a child can be one of life’s most joyful events . 
 “ When I first gazed at my newborn daughter , it was a wonderful feeling , ” says a mother named Aleah . 
 “ I thought she was the most beautiful child I had ever seen . ” 
 Such a joyful occasion , though , can also create anxiety for parents . 
 “ My concern , ” says Aleah’s husband , “ was whether I could properly prepare my daughter for the trials of life . ” 
 Many parents share such concerns and realize the need for training their children with love . 
 However , Christian parents who desire to give such loving training face challenges . 
 What are some of them ? 
 What challenges do parents face ? 
 We are now living deep in the last days of this system . 
 As foretold , a loveless attitude pervades society . 
 Even among family members , people display “ no natural affection ” and have become “ unthankful , disloyal , . . . without self - control , fierce . ” 
 Daily contact with people who display such traits can affect the way members of Christian families treat one another . 
 In addition , parents wrestle with their own inherited tendency to lose self - control , to say things they do not mean , and to use poor judgment in other ways . ​ — Romans 3 : 23 ; James 3 : 2 , 8 , 9 . 
 How can parents raise happy children ? 
 Despite these challenges , parents can raise happy , spiritually healthy children . 
 How ? 
 By following the Bible’s advice : “ Let all your affairs take place with love . ” 
 Indeed , love is “ a perfect bond of union . ” 
 Let us examine three aspects of love described by the apostle Paul in his first letter to the Corinthians and discuss some specific ways parents can put this quality to work as they train their children . ​ — 1 Corinthians 13 : 4 - 8 . 
 The Need to Be Long - Suffering 
 Why do parents need to be long - suffering ? 
 Paul wrote : “ Love is long - suffering . ” 
 The Greek expression translated “ long - suffering ” denotes patience and slowness to anger . 
 Why do parents need to be long - suffering ? 
 Most parents can no doubt think of many reasons . 
 Consider just a few . 
 Children seldom ask just once for some desired object . 
 Even if a parent replies with a firm no , the child may ask again and again , hoping for a different answer . 
 Teenagers may want to argue at length that they should be allowed to take some course of action that the parent knows to be foolish . 
 And like all of us , children are prone to repeat some of their mistakes . ​ — Psalm 130 : 3 . 
 What can help parents to be long - suffering ? 
 What can help parents to be long - suffering and patient with their children ? 
 King Solomon wrote : “ The insight of a man certainly slows down his anger . ” 
 Parents gain insight into their children’s behavior by recalling that at one time they too used to “ speak as a babe , to think as a babe , to reason as a babe . ” 
 Parents , can you remember bothering your mother or father to give in to a childish request ? 
 As a teenager , did you ever think that your parents just did not understand your feelings or problems ? 
 If so , you likely appreciate why your children behave as they do and why they need constant , patient reminders of your decisions . 
 It is worth noting that Jehovah told Israelite parents to “ inculcate ” his laws in their young ones . 
 The Hebrew word for “ inculcate ” means “ to repeat , ” “ to say again and again , ” “ to impress . ” 
 This implies that parents may have to repeat themselves many times before a child learns to apply God’s laws . 
 Similar repetition is often needed to teach other lessons in life . 
 Why is a long - suffering parent not a permissive one ? 
 A long - suffering parent , however , is not a permissive parent . 
 God’s Word warns : “ A boy let on the loose will be causing his mother shame . ” 
 To prevent such an outcome , the same proverb states : “ The rod and reproof are what give wisdom . ” 
 At times , children may question the right of parents to reprove them . 
 But Christian families should not be run as a democracy , as if the parents ’ right to enforce rules were somehow dependent on the children’s approval . 
 Rather , Jehovah , as the ultimate Head of the family , confers on parents the authority to train and discipline their children lovingly . 
 In fact , discipline is closely linked with the next aspect of love mentioned by Paul . 
 How to Discipline in Love 
 Why will kind parents discipline their children , and what is included in such discipline ? 
 Paul wrote that “ love is . . . kind . ” 
 Parents who are truly kind will discipline their children in a consistent manner . 
 By doing so , they imitate Jehovah . 
 “ Whom Jehovah loves he disciplines , ” wrote Paul . 
 Please note that the type of discipline referred to in the Bible does not simply mean punishment . 
 It carries the idea of training and education . 
 What is the purpose of such discipline ? 
 “ To those who have been trained by it , ” Paul states , “ it yields peaceable fruit , namely , righteousness . ” 
 When parents kindly educate their children according to God’s will , they give them the opportunity to become peaceable , upright adults . 
 If children accept “ the discipline of Jehovah , ” they gain wisdom , knowledge , and discernment ​ — assets more valuable than silver or gold . ​ — Proverbs 3 : 11 - 18 . 
 What usually results when parents fail to discipline their children ? 
 On the other hand , it is not a kindness when parents fail to discipline their children . 
 Jehovah inspired Solomon to write : “ The one holding back his rod is hating his son , but the one loving him is he that does look for him with discipline . ” 
 Children raised without consistent discipline are likely to be self - centered and unhappy . 
 In contrast , the children of parents who are sympathetic but maintain firm limits were found to perform better at school , to have better social skills , and to be generally happy . 
 Certainly , then , parents who discipline their children are being kind to them . 
 What do Christian parents teach their children , and how should these requirements be viewed ? 
 What is involved in disciplining children in a kind and loving manner ? 
 Parents need to discuss with their children exactly what is required of them . 
 For example , from infancy , children of Christian parents are taught fundamental Bible principles as well as the need to participate in the various aspects of true worship . 
 Children need to know that these requirements are nonnegotiable . 
 10 , 11 . 
 Why might parents consider their children’s concerns when making house rules ? 
 At times , though , parents may want to bring their children into the discussion when formulating house rules . 
 If youths are able to share in discussions about those rules , they may be more inclined to obey them . 
 For instance , in case parents decide to impose a curfew , they could choose a specific hour that the children are required to be at home . 
 Or , as an alternative , they might allow their children to suggest an hour and to offer reasons for their preference . 
 The parents may then state their own desired time and explain why they feel that this is appropriate . 
 If there is a difference of opinion , as there will likely be , what then ? 
 In some cases , the parents may decide that it might be possible to accommodate their children’s wishes when Bible principles are not jeopardized . 
 Does this mean that the parents are abdicating , or giving up , their authority ? 
 To answer that question , consider the way in which Jehovah lovingly exercised his authority when dealing with Lot and his family . 
 After escorting Lot , his wife , and his daughters out of Sodom , the angels said to them : “ Escape to the mountainous region for fear you may be swept away ! ” 
 However , Lot replied : “ Not that , please , Jehovah ! ” 
 Lot then suggested an alternative : “ Please , now , this city is nearby to flee there and it is a small thing . 
 May I , please , escape there ? ” 
 What was Jehovah’s response ? 
 “ Here I do show you consideration to this extent also , ” he said . 
 Did Jehovah abdicate his authority ? 
 Certainly not ! 
 Nevertheless , he considered Lot’s request and chose to extend extra kindness to him in this matter . 
 If you are a parent , are there times when you can consider your children’s concerns when establishing family rules ? 
 What will help a child to feel secure ? 
 Of course , children need to know not only the rules but also the penalties for breaking those rules . 
 Once the penalties have been discussed and are understood , the rules need to be enforced . 
 Parents are not being kind if they constantly warn their children about a deserved punishment but fail to carry it out . 
 “ Because sentence against a bad work has not been executed speedily , that is why the heart of the sons of men has become fully set in them to do bad , ” says the Bible . 
 True , a parent may refrain from punishing a child in public or around the child’s peers , thus saving the young one some embarrassment . 
 But children feel more secure and develop more respect and love for their parents when they know that their parents ’ “ Yes ” means yes and their “ No ” means no ​ — even if that entails punishment . ​ — Matthew 5 : 37 . 
 13 , 14 . 
 How can parents imitate Jehovah when training their children ? 
 If it is to be kind , the punishment and the way it is administered need to be tailored to the child . 
 “ Our two children had different needs when it came to discipline , ” recalls Pam . 
 “ What worked with one child didn’t work for the other . ” 
 Her husband , Larry , explains : “ Our elder daughter was strong - willed and seemed to respond only to stern discipline . 
 However , our younger daughter was very responsive to firm words and even a disapproving look . ” 
 Indeed , kind parents strive to discern what discipline works best for each of their children . 
 Jehovah sets the pattern for parents in that he knows the strengths and weaknesses of each of his servants . 
 In addition , when meting out punishment , Jehovah is neither unduly stern nor overly permissive . 
 Instead , he always disciplines his people “ to the proper degree . ” 
 Parents , do you know your children’s strengths and weaknesses ? 
 Are you able to use that knowledge in a positive , kind way to train them ? 
 If so , you are proving that you love your children . 
 Encourage Honest Communication 
 15 , 16 . 
 How can parents encourage their children to speak honestly , and what approach have Christian parents found effective in this regard ? 
 Another facet of love is that “ it does not rejoice over unrighteousness , but rejoices with the truth . ” 
 How can parents train their children to love what is right and true ? 
 A fundamental step is to encourage their children to express their feelings honestly , even if what the children say is difficult for the parents to accept . 
 Understandably , parents rejoice when children express thoughts and feelings in harmony with righteous standards . 
 At other times , though , a child’s heartfelt comments may reveal an inclination toward unrighteousness . 
 How should parents respond ? 
 Their initial tendency might be to chastise their children immediately for expressing such thoughts . 
 If parents respond in such a way , the children might soon learn to say only what they think the parents want to hear . 
 Of course , disrespectful speech should be promptly corrected , but there is a difference between teaching children how to communicate politely and dictating what they say . 
 How can parents encourage honest communication ? 
 Aleah , mentioned earlier , says , “ We have created an atmosphere of open communication by trying not to overreact when our children tell us things that we find troubling . ” 
 A father named Tom says : “ We encouraged our daughter to express herself to us , even when she didn’t agree with our way of thinking . 
 We felt that if we always cut her off and arbitrarily imposed our will , she would become frustrated and would learn not to tell us what was really in her heart . 
 On the other hand , listening to her encouraged her to listen to us . ” 
 Certainly , children should obey their parents . 
 But open communication gives parents the opportunity to help their children develop reasoning ability . 
 Vincent , a father of four , says : “ Often , we would talk through the advantages and disadvantages of a situation so that our children could see for themselves the best outcome . 
 This helped them develop thinking ability . ” ​ — Proverbs 1 : 1 - 4 . 
 Of what can parents be sure ? 
 Of course , no parent will be able to apply perfectly the Bible’s counsel on child rearing . 
 Even so , you can be sure that your children will deeply appreciate your attempts to train them in a long - suffering , kind , and loving manner . 
 Jehovah will certainly bless your efforts to do so . 
 Ultimately , all Christian parents want their children to learn to love Jehovah as much as they themselves do . 
 How can parents reach this noble goal ? 
 The following article will discuss some specific methods . 
 Do You Recall ? 
 • How can showing insight help a parent to be long - suffering ? 
 • How are kindness and discipline related ? 
 • Why is honest communication between parents and children vital ? 
 [ Pictures on page 23 ] 
 Parents , can you remember what it was like to be a child ? 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 Do you encourage honest , open communication with your children ? 
 Teach Your Children to Love Jehovah 
 “ Like arrows in the hand of a mighty man , so are the sons of youth . ” ​ — PSALM 127 : 4 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 How are children like “ arrows in the hand of a mighty man ” ? 
 AN ARCHER prepares to shoot an arrow at a target . 
 He carefully places it against the bowstring , and with flexed muscles he bends his bow . 
 Despite the strain , he takes time to aim the arrow . 
 Then he lets it fly ! 
 Will the arrow hit the target ? 
 Several factors determine the answer , including the skill of the archer , the effect of the wind , and the condition of the arrow . 
 King Solomon likened children to “ arrows in the hand of a mighty man . ” 
 Consider how this illustration might be applied . 
 An archer has the arrow in his bow for only a relatively short time . 
 To hit the target , he must quickly let it go . 
 Likewise , parents have only a relatively short period of time to develop in their children heartfelt love for Jehovah . 
 After what seems to be just a few short years , the children grow up and leave home . 
 Will they hit the target ​ — that is , will the children continue to love and serve God after they leave home ? 
 Numerous factors influence the answer . 
 Three of them are the skill of the parent , the environment in which the children are raised , and the way the ‘ arrow , ’ or child , responds to the training he or she receives . 
 Let us examine each of these factors in more detail . 
 First , we will consider some of the traits of a skillful parent . 
 Skillful Parents Set a Good Example 
 Why must a parent’s words be backed up by actions ? 
 Jesus set the example for parents in that he practiced what he preached . 
 On the other hand , he condemned the Pharisees , who would “ say ” but “ not perform . ” 
 In order to motivate their children to love Jehovah , the parents ’ words and actions must work together . 
 Words that are not backed up by actions are just as ineffective as a bow without a bowstring . ​ — 1 John 3 : 18 . 
 What questions do parents do well to ask themselves , and why ? 
 Why is parental example so important ? 
 Just as adults can learn to love God by looking at Jesus ’ example , children can learn to love Jehovah by following their parents ’ good example . 
 A child’s associates can either strengthen the child or “ spoil useful habits . ” 
 For much of a child’s life , and certainly during the important formative years , the closest , most influential associates a child has are his parents . 
 Therefore , parents do well to ask themselves : ‘ What sort of associate am I ? 
 Does my example encourage my child to develop useful habits ? 
 What example am I setting in the vital areas of prayer and Bible study ? ’ 
 Skillful Parents Pray With Their Children 
 What can children learn from a parent’s prayers ? 
 Your children can learn much about Jehovah by listening to your prayers . 
 If they hear you give thanks to God at mealtimes and offer prayers at Bible study sessions , what conclusions might they draw ? 
 They will likely learn that Jehovah supplies our physical needs ​ — for which he should be thanked — ​ and that he teaches us spiritual truths . 
 These are valuable lessons . ​ — James 1 : 17 . 
 How can parents help children to feel that Jehovah is interested in them as individuals ? 
 However , if you pray with your family at times other than meals and family Bible studies and if you discuss specific matters that affect you and your children , you will accomplish even more . 
 You will help your children to feel that Jehovah is part of your family , that he cares deeply about you individually . 
 One father says : “ From the time our daughter was born , we prayed with her . 
 As she grew older , we prayed about relationship issues and other matters that affected her . 
 Until she left home to marry , not a day went by that we did not pray together with her . ” 
 Could you also pray with your children each day ? 
 Could you help them view Jehovah as a Friend , who not only provides their physical and spiritual necessities but also cares about their emotional needs ? ​ — Philippians 4 : 6 , 7 . 
 To make their prayers specific , what do parents need to know ? 
 Of course , for you to make your prayers specific , you need to know what is happening in your child’s life . 
 Note the comments of one father who raised two children : “ At the end of each week , I asked myself two questions : ‘ What things were of concern to my children this week ? 
 And what good things happened in their world ? ’ ” 
 Parents , can you ask yourselves such questions and then incorporate some of the answers into the prayers you say with your children ? 
 If you do , you will be teaching them not only to pray to Jehovah ​ — the Hearer of prayer — ​ but also to love him . ​ — Psalm 65 : 2 . 
 Skillful Parents Encourage Good Study Habits 
 Why must parents help their children to acquire the habit of studying God’s Word ? 
 How can a parent’s attitude toward Bible study influence a child’s relationship with God ? 
 For any relationship to grow and survive , the individuals involved must not only talk to each other but also listen . 
 One of the ways we listen to Jehovah is by studying the Bible with the aid of publications supplied by ‘ the faithful slave . ’ 
 Therefore , to help their children develop a lasting , loving relationship with Jehovah , parents do well to encourage them to develop the habit of studying God’s Word . 
 How can children be helped to develop good study habits ? 
 How can children be helped to develop good study habits ? 
 Again , a parent’s example teaches best . 
 Do your children regularly see you enjoying personal Bible reading or study ? 
 True , you are likely very busy caring for your children , and you may wonder when you can find time to read and study . 
 But ask yourself , ‘ Do my children regularly see me watching television ? ’ 
 If so , could you use some of that time to set a good example for them regarding personal study ? 
 10 , 11 . 
 Why should parents have regular family Bible discussions ? 
 Another practical way parents can teach children to listen to Jehovah is by having regular family Bible discussions . 
 Some may wonder , though , ‘ Why do children need a family study if their parents regularly take them to congregation meetings ? ’ 
 There are several good reasons . 
 Jehovah entrusts parents with the primary responsibility to teach their children . 
 Family Bible study teaches children that worship is , not a formal ritual observed only in public , but part of the family’s private life . ​ — Deuteronomy 6 : 6 - 9 . 
 In addition , a well - conducted family study can provide parents with a window into their children’s thinking on spiritual and moral matters . 
 For instance , when children are young , parents can use such publications as Learn From the Great Teacher . 
 * In almost every paragraph of this Bible study aid , children are asked to express their opinion on the subjects discussed . 
 By reasoning on the scriptures mentioned in the book , parents may be able to help children to develop their perceptive powers “ to distinguish both right and wrong . ” ​ — Hebrews 5 : 14 . 
 How might parents adapt the family study to a child’s needs , and what have you found to be effective in this regard ? 
 As your children grow , adapt the study to their needs . 
 Note the way one couple helped their teenage children to reason on a request to attend a school dance . 
 The father says : “ We told our children that during a portion of the next family study , my wife and I would play the part of the children , and our girls could pretend to be the parents . 
 Either child could assume the role of Father or Mother , but the children had to work together to research the subject and to give direction about school dances . ” 
 What was the result ? 
 “ We were amazed at how responsible our daughters ( in their role as the parents ) were when explaining to us ( as the children ) their Bible - based reasons why it would be unwise to go to the dance , ” the father continues . 
 “ What further impressed us were the suggestions they came up with as acceptable alternatives to this activity . 
 These gave us valuable insight into their thinking and desires . ” 
 True , it requires perseverance and imagination to keep a family study regular and relevant , but the rewards are worth the effort . ​ — Proverbs 23 : 15 . 
 Create a Peaceful Environment 
 13 , 14 . ( a ) How can parents create a peaceful home environment ? 
 ( b ) What can be the beneficial result when a parent admits to having made a mistake ? 
 An arrow is more likely to hit the target if the archer aims and releases it in calm conditions . 
 Similarly , children are more likely to learn to love Jehovah if parents create a peaceful home environment . 
 “ The fruit of righteousness has its seed sown under peaceful conditions for those who are making peace , ” wrote James . 
 How can parents create a peaceful environment at home ? 
 A married couple needs to maintain a strong marital bond . 
 A husband and wife who love and respect each other have a better chance of teaching their children to love and respect others , including Jehovah . 
 Love and respect promote peace . 
 And a couple who are at peace with each other are better able to deal with conflicts that may arise within the family . 
 Of course , just as there are no perfect marriages , there are no perfect families on earth at present . 
 Parents may at times fail to display the fruitage of the spirit when dealing with their children . 
 When that happens , what should parents do ? 
 If they admit to making a mistake , will it lessen a child’s respect for them ? 
 Consider the apostle Paul’s example . 
 He was like a spiritual father to many . 
 Yet , he openly admitted that he made mistakes . 
 Even so , his humility and honesty raise our respect for him rather than diminish it . 
 Despite his shortcomings , Paul could confidently write to the congregation in Corinth : “ Become imitators of me , even as I am of Christ . ” 
 If you too admit your mistakes , your children will likely overlook your failings . 
 15 , 16 . 
 Why should parents train their children to love their Christian brothers and sisters , and how can this be done ? 
 What else can parents do to create an environment where their children can grow to love Jehovah ? 
 The apostle John wrote : “ If anyone makes the statement : ‘ I love God , ’ and yet is hating his brother , he is a liar . 
 For he who does not love his brother , whom he has seen , cannot be loving God , whom he has not seen . ” 
 Therefore , when you train your children to love their Christian brothers and sisters , you are teaching them to love God . 
 Parents do well to ask themselves , ‘ Is the dominant tone of my conversations about the congregation encouraging or critical ? ’ 
 How can you know ? 
 Listen closely to the way your children speak about the meetings and the members of the congregation . 
 You are likely to hear your thoughts echoed in their comments . 
 What can parents do to help their children to love their spiritual brothers ? 
 Peter , a father of two teenage boys , says : “ Since our boys were young , we have regularly had spiritually mature ones over to eat with us and spend time with us in our home , and we’ve had a lot of fun doing it . 
 Our boys have grown up rubbing shoulders with people who love Jehovah , and they now see that serving God is an enjoyable way of life . ” 
 Dennis , a father of five girls , says , “ We encouraged our girls to befriend the older pioneers in the congregation , and whenever possible we showed hospitality to traveling overseers and their wives . ” 
 Can you also take the initiative to help your children to view the congregation as an extension of your family ? ​ — Mark 10 : 29 , 30 . 
 A Child’s Responsibility 
 What decision do children eventually have to make ? 
 Consider again the illustration of the archer . 
 Although he may be skilled , he is unlikely to hit the target if the arrow he shoots has become bent or warped . 
 Of course , parents will try hard to straighten the bent arrow , so to speak , by striving to adjust a child’s wrong thinking . 
 But children must eventually decide for themselves whether to let this world bend them to its will or to allow Jehovah to make their “ paths straight . ” ​ — Proverbs 3 : 5 , 6 ; Romans 12 : 2 . 
 What effect can a child’s choice have on others ? 
 While parents have a weighty responsibility to raise their children in “ the discipline and mental - regulating of Jehovah , ” the final decision as to what a child will grow up to become rests with the child himself . 
 Therefore , children , ask yourselves , ‘ Will I accept the loving training my parents provide ? ’ 
 If you do , you will be choosing the best possible way of life . 
 You will make your parents very happy . 
 Most important , you will make Jehovah’s heart rejoice . ​ — Proverbs 27 : 11 . 
 [ Footnote ] 
 Published by Jehovah’s Witnesses . 
 Do You Recall ? 
 • How can parents set a good example with regard to prayer and Bible study ? 
 • How can parents create a peaceful home environment ? 
 • What choice do children face , and how will the choice they make affect others ? 
 [ Picture on page 28 ] 
 Do you set a good example for your child in personal study ? 
 [ Picture on page 29 ] 
 A peaceful family environment contributes to happiness 
 “ Your Father Is Merciful ” 
 “ Continue becoming merciful , just as your Father is merciful . ” ​ — LUKE 6 : 36 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 How do Jesus ’ words to the scribes and the Pharisees and to his followers show that mercy is a desirable quality ? 
 THE Law given through Moses contained some 600 requirements and regulations . 
 Although discharging the obligations of the Mosaic Law was necessary , the showing of mercy was also of major importance . 
 Consider what Jesus said to the Pharisees , who manifested an unmerciful attitude . 
 On two occasions he rebuked them , pointing out that God had decreed : “ I want mercy , and not sacrifice . ” 
 Toward the end of his ministry , Jesus said : “ Woe to you , scribes and Pharisees , hypocrites ! 
 because you give the tenth of the mint and the dill and the cumin , but you have disregarded the weightier matters of the Law , namely , justice and mercy and faithfulness . ” ​ — Matthew 23 : 23 . 
 Undeniably , Jesus placed a high value on mercy . 
 He told his followers : “ Continue becoming merciful , just as your Father is merciful . ” 
 To “ become imitators of God ” in this regard , however , we need to know what true mercy is . 
 Moreover , appreciating the benefits of mercy will move us to display this quality more fully in our lives . 
 Mercy Toward the Disadvantaged 
 Why should we look to Jehovah to learn what true mercy is ? 
 The psalmist sang : “ Jehovah is gracious and merciful , slow to anger and great in loving - kindness . 
 Jehovah is good to all , and his mercies are over all his works . ” 
 Jehovah is “ the Father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort . ” 
 Mercy is shown by treating someone in a compassionate way . 
 This is a major facet of God’s personality . 
 His example and his instructions to us can teach us what true mercy is . 
 What does Isaiah 49 : 15 teach us about mercy ? 
 As recorded at Isaiah 49 : 15 , Jehovah says : “ Can a wife forget her suckling so that she should not pity the son of her belly ? ” 
 Hebrew words closely related to the one here translated “ pity ” are used in connection with mercy at Psalm 145 : 8 , 9 , quoted above . 
 The emotion that moves Jehovah to be merciful is compared to the warm feeling that a nursing mother normally has for her child . 
 Perhaps the baby is hungry or has some other need . 
 Moved by the feelings of compassion or sympathy that this stirs in her , the mother attends to her infant’s need . 
 Jehovah has such tender feelings for those to whom he shows mercy . 
 How did Jehovah show himself to be “ rich in mercy ” toward Israel ? 
 It is one thing to feel compassion but quite another to act on it for the benefit of the disadvantaged . 
 Consider how Jehovah responded when his worshippers were in bondage in Egypt some 3,500 years ago . 
 He told Moses : “ Unquestionably I have seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt , and I have heard their outcry as a result of those who drive them to work ; because I well know the pains they suffer . 
 And I am proceeding to go down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians and to bring them up out of that land to a land good and spacious , to a land flowing with milk and honey . ” 
 About 500 years after the Israelites were delivered from Egypt , Jehovah reminded them : “ It was I who brought Israel up out of Egypt and who went delivering you from the hand of Egypt and from the hand of all the kingdoms that were oppressing you . ” 
 Because of deviating from God’s righteous standards , the Israelites were frequently in sore straits . 
 Yet , Jehovah felt compassion for them and repeatedly came to their rescue . 
 This illustrates how the loving God responds to those in need , in danger , or in difficulty . 
 Jehovah is “ rich in mercy . ” ​ — Ephesians 2 : 4 . 
 How did Jesus Christ imitate his Father in showing mercy ? 
 When on earth , Jesus Christ imitated his Father perfectly in displaying mercy . 
 How did Jesus respond when two blind men beseeched him , saying : “ Lord , have mercy on us , Son of David ” ? 
 They were begging Jesus to restore their sight miraculously . 
 Jesus did so , but he did not perform the miracle in a matter - of - fact manner . 
 “ Moved with pity , ” says the Bible , “ Jesus touched their eyes , and immediately they received sight . ” 
 Pity moved Jesus to perform many miracles that brought relief to the blind , the demon - possessed , the leprous , and the parents of afflicted children . ​ — Matthew 9 : 27 ; 15 : 22 ; 17 : 15 ; Mark 5 : 18 , 19 ; Luke 17 : 12 , 13 . 
 What do the examples of Jehovah God and his Son teach us about mercy ? 
 The examples of Jehovah God and Jesus Christ show that mercy has two components ​ — feelings of compassion , sympathy , or pity toward the disadvantaged and action that brings relief to the recipient . 
 Being merciful requires both elements . 
 In the Scriptures , mercy most often refers to a positive expression of kind consideration toward those in need . 
 How , though , is mercy displayed in a judicial context ? 
 Does it also involve what might be viewed as a negative action , such as a holding back of punishment ? 
 Mercy Toward Transgressors 
 8 , 9 . 
 What did the mercy shown to David after his sin with Bath - sheba involve ? 
 Consider what happened after Nathan the prophet confronted King David of ancient Israel about David’s adulterous relationship with Bath - sheba . 
 The repentant David prayed : “ Show me favor , O God , according to your loving - kindness . 
 According to the abundance of your mercies wipe out my transgressions . 
 Thoroughly wash me from my error , and cleanse me even from my sin . 
 For my transgressions I myself know , and my sin is in front of me constantly . 
 Against you , you alone , I have sinned , and what is bad in your eyes I have done . ” ​ — Psalm 51 : 1 - 4 . 
 David was cut to the heart . 
 Jehovah pardoned his sin and exercised restraint in administering judgment upon him and Bath - sheba . 
 According to the Mosaic Law , both David and Bath - sheba should have been put to death . 
 While they did not escape all the consequences of their sin , their lives were spared . 
 God’s exercise of mercy entails the pardoning of error . 
 However , he does not hold back from administering appropriate punishment . 
 Although Jehovah is merciful in rendering judgment , why must we not presume upon his mercy ? 
 Since “ through one man [ Adam ] sin entered into the world ” and “ the wages sin pays is death , ” all humans are deserving of death . 
 How grateful we can be that Jehovah shows mercy when rendering judgment ! 
 However , we must be careful not to presume upon God’s mercy . 
 “ All [ Jehovah’s ] ways are justice , ” states Deuteronomy 32 : 4 . 
 In granting mercy , God does not ignore his perfect standards of justice . 
 How did Jehovah show due regard for justice in dealing with David for his sin with Bath - sheba ? 
 In the case of David and Bath - sheba , before the judgment of the death penalty could be softened , there had to be a pardoning of their sin . 
 The Israelite judges were not authorized to do this . 
 If they had been allowed to handle the case , they would have had no alternative but to pronounce the sentence of death . 
 This is what the Law required . 
 Out of regard for his covenant with David , however , Jehovah wanted to see if there was a basis for forgiving David’s sin . 
 Hence , Jehovah God , “ the Judge of all the earth , ” who is “ an examiner of the heart , ” chose to handle the matter himself . 
 God could accurately read David’s heart , evaluate the genuineness of his repentance , and grant forgiveness . 
 How may sinful humans avail themselves of God’s mercy ? 
 The mercy that Jehovah shows us by making possible our release from the penalty of inherited sin is in accord with his justice . 
 To make possible the forgiveness of sin without the violation of justice , Jehovah has provided the ransom sacrifice of his Son , Jesus Christ ​ — the greatest expression of mercy ever shown . 
 To avail ourselves of God’s mercy , which can save us from receiving punishment for inherited sin , we must ‘ exercise faith in the Son . ’ ​ — John 3 : 16 , 36 . 
 A God of Mercy and Justice 
 13 , 14 . 
 Does God’s mercy temper his justice ? 
 Explain . 
 While Jehovah’s mercy does not violate his standard of justice , does it in some way affect his justice ? 
 Does mercy lessen the impact of divine justice by tempering it ? 
 No , it does not . 
 Through the prophet Hosea , Jehovah told the Israelites : “ I will engage you to me for time indefinite , and I will engage you to me in righteousness and in justice and in loving - kindness and in mercies . ” 
 These words clearly show that Jehovah’s exercise of mercy is always in harmony with his other attributes , including justice . 
 Jehovah is “ a God merciful and gracious , . . . pardoning error and transgression and sin , but by no means will he give exemption from punishment . ” 
 Jehovah is a God of mercy and justice . 
 Concerning him , the Bible states : “ The Rock , perfect is his activity , for all his ways are justice . ” 
 God’s justice is perfect , as is his mercy . 
 Neither is superior to the other , nor does one need the other to temper its effect . 
 Rather , both qualities work in perfect harmony with each other . 
 15 , 16 . ( a ) What shows that divine justice is not harsh ? 
 ( b ) When Jehovah executes his judgment upon this wicked system of things , of what can his worshippers be sure ? 
 Jehovah’s justice is not harsh . 
 Justice almost invariably has legal implications , and judgment usually calls for the meting out of deserved punishment to wrongdoers . 
 However , godly justice can also involve salvation for deserving ones . 
 For example , when the wicked in the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah met their end , the patriarch Lot and his two daughters were saved . ​ — Genesis 19 : 12 - 26 . 
 We can be confident that when Jehovah executes his judgment upon the present wicked system of things , the “ great crowd ” of true worshippers , who “ have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb , ” will be spared . 
 Thus , they will “ come out of the great tribulation . ” ​ — Revelation 7 : 9 - 14 . 
 Why Be Merciful ? 
 What is a fundamental reason to be merciful ? 
 The examples of Jehovah and Jesus Christ indeed teach us what true mercy is . 
 Giving us a fundamental reason to be merciful , Proverbs 19 : 17 states : “ He that is showing favor to the lowly one is lending to Jehovah , and his treatment He will repay to him . ” 
 Jehovah is pleased when we imitate him and his Son by being merciful in our dealings with one another . 
 And others are encouraged to be merciful , for mercy begets mercy . ​ — Luke 6 : 38 . 
 Why should we strive to be merciful ? 
 Mercy is a blend of many good qualities . 
 It involves graciousness , love , kindness , and goodness . 
 Tender feelings of compassion or sympathy are at the root of acts of mercy . 
 While godly mercy does not compromise justice , Jehovah is slow to anger and patiently gives wrongdoers sufficient time to attain to repentance . 
 Mercy is thus related to patience and long - suffering . 
 As a combination of many desirable traits ​ — including various aspects of the fruitage of God’s spirit — ​ mercy becomes a framework within which these qualities may be cultivated . 
 How vital that we strive to be merciful ! 
 “ Happy Are the Merciful ” 
 19 , 20 . 
 In what way does mercy exult over judgment ? 
 The disciple James tells us why we should make mercy an essential quality in our lives . 
 He wrote : “ Mercy exults triumphantly over judgment . ” 
 James was speaking of the mercy that a worshipper of Jehovah shows toward others . 
 It exults triumphantly over judgment in that when the time comes for a person to “ render an account for himself to God , ” Jehovah takes into consideration his merciful dealings and forgives him on the basis of the ransom sacrifice of His Son . 
 No doubt , one of the reasons why David was shown mercy for his sin with Bath - sheba was that he himself was a merciful man . 
 On the other hand , “ the one that does not practice mercy will have his judgment without mercy . ” 
 No wonder the “ merciless ” are listed among those whom God views as “ deserving of death ” ! ​ — Romans 1 : 31 , 32 . 
 In his Sermon on the Mount , Jesus said : “ Happy are the merciful , since they will be shown mercy . ” 
 How forcefully these words show that those seeking God’s mercy should themselves be merciful ! 
 The following article will discuss how we can practice mercy in our daily life . 
 What Did You Learn ? 
 • What is mercy ? 
 • In what ways is mercy manifested ? 
 • In what way is Jehovah a God of mercy and justice ? 
 • Why should we be merciful ? 
 [ Picture on page 21 ] 
 Jehovah’s tender feeling for those in need is like that of a mother for her baby 
 [ Picture on page 23 ] 
 What do we learn about mercy from Jesus ’ miracles ? 
 [ Picture on page 24 ] 
 Did Jehovah violate his justice by extending mercy to David ? 
 [ Picture on page 25 ] 
 God’s mercy toward sinful humans is in accord with his justice 
 Practice Mercy ​ — How ? 
 “ Let us work what is good toward all , but especially toward those related to us in the faith . ” ​ — GALATIANS 6 : 10 . 
 1 , 2 . 
 What does the parable of the neighborly Samaritan teach us about mercy ? 
 WHILE speaking with Jesus , a man versed in the Law asked him : “ Who really is my neighbor ? ” 
 In reply , Jesus related the following parable : “ A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among robbers , who both stripped him and inflicted blows , and went off , leaving him half - dead . 
 Now , by coincidence , a certain priest was going down over that road , but , when he saw him , he went by on the opposite side . 
 Likewise , a Levite also , when he got down to the place and saw him , went by on the opposite side . 
 But a certain Samaritan traveling the road came upon him and , at seeing him , he was moved with pity . 
 So he approached him and bound up his wounds , pouring oil and wine upon them . 
 Then he mounted him upon his own beast and brought him to an inn and took care of him . 
 And the next day he took out two denarii , gave them to the innkeeper , and said , ‘ Take care of him , and whatever you spend besides this , I will repay you when I come back here . ’ ” 
 Next , Jesus asked his listener : “ Who of these three seems to you to have made himself neighbor to the man that fell among the robbers ? ” 
 The man answered : “ The one that acted mercifully toward him . ” ​ — Luke 10 : 25 , 29 - 37a . 
 How vividly the Samaritan’s treatment of the injured man illustrates what true mercy is ! 
 Moved by a feeling of pity , or compassion , the Samaritan acted in a way that brought relief to the victim . 
 Moreover , the man in need was a stranger to the Samaritan . 
 Mercy is not hindered by national , religious , or cultural barriers . 
 After giving the illustration about the neighborly Samaritan , Jesus advised his listener : “ Go your way and be doing the same yourself . ” 
 We can take that admonition to heart and strive to be merciful to others . 
 But how ? 
 In what ways can we practice mercy in our everyday life ? 
 “ If a Brother . . . 
 Is in a Naked State ” 
 3 , 4 . 
 Why should we be especially concerned about practicing mercy within the Christian congregation ? 
 “ As long as we have time favorable for it , ” said the apostle Paul , “ let us work what is good toward all , but especially toward those related to us in the faith . ” 
 Let us , then , first consider how we can abound in deeds of mercy toward those related to us in the faith . 
 Exhorting true Christians to be merciful to one another , the disciple James wrote : “ The one that does not practice mercy will have his judgment without mercy . ” 
 The context of these inspired words tells us some ways in which we can practice mercy . 
 At James 1 : 27 , for example , we read : “ The form of worship that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father is this : to look after orphans and widows in their tribulation , and to keep oneself without spot from the world . ” 
 James 2 : 15 , 16 states : “ If a brother or a sister is in a naked state and lacking the food sufficient for the day , yet a certain one of you says to them : ‘ Go in peace , keep warm and well fed , ’ but you do not give them the necessities for their body , of what benefit is it ? ” 
 5 , 6 . 
 How may we abound in deeds of mercy in our association with the local congregation ? 
 Caring for others and helping those in need is a feature of true religion . 
 Our way of worship does not allow us to limit our concern for others to a mere oral expression of the wish that everything will turn out well for them . 
 Rather , a tender feeling of compassion moves us to act in behalf of those in serious need . 
 Yes , preparing a meal for a sick person , assisting an elderly one with chores , providing transportation to Christian meetings when necessary , and not being closefisted toward deserving ones are among the deeds of mercy we should abound in . ​ — Deuteronomy 15 : 7 - 10 . 
 Of greater importance than giving materially is giving spiritually to assist members of the expanding Christian congregation . 
 We are exhorted to “ speak consolingly to the depressed souls , support the weak . ” 
 “ The aged women ” are encouraged to be “ teachers of what is good . ” 
 Concerning Christian overseers , the Bible states : “ Each one must prove to be like a hiding place from the wind and a place of concealment from the rainstorm . ” ​ — Isaiah 32 : 2 . 
 From the disciples in Syrian Antioch , what do we learn about displaying mercy ? 
 In addition to caring for widows , orphans , and those in need of assistance and encouragement locally , the first - century congregations at times organized relief measures in behalf of believers in other places . 
 For example , when the prophet Agabus foretold that “ a great famine was about to come upon the entire inhabited earth , ” the disciples in Syrian Antioch “ determined , each of them according as anyone could afford it , to send a relief ministration to the brothers dwelling in Judea . ” 
 This was dispatched to the elders there “ by the hand of Barnabas and Saul . ” 
 What about today ? 
 “ The faithful and discreet slave ” has organized relief committees to care for our brothers who may be affected by natural disasters , such as hurricanes , earthquakes , or tsunamis . 
 Voluntarily contributing our time , effort , and resources in cooperation with this arrangement is a fine way for us to display mercy . 
 “ If You Continue Showing Favoritism ” 
 How does favoritism work against mercy ? 
 Warning about a characteristic that works against mercy and “ the kingly law ” of love , James wrote : “ If you continue showing favoritism , you are working a sin , for you are reproved by the law as transgressors . ” 
 Showing undue favor to the materially rich or to those having prominence can make us less sensitive to “ the complaining cry of the lowly one . ” 
 Favoritism stifles a merciful spirit . 
 We practice mercy by treating others impartially . 
 Why is it not wrong to show special consideration to deserving ones ? 
 Does being impartial mean that we should never show special consideration to anyone ? 
 Hardly . 
 Concerning his fellow worker Epaphroditus , the apostle Paul wrote to Christians in Philippi : “ Keep holding men of that sort dear . ” 
 Why ? 
 “ Because on account of the Lord’s work he came quite near to death , exposing his soul to danger , that he might fully make up for your not being here to render private service to me . ” 
 The faithful service rendered by Epaphroditus deserved recognition . 
 Moreover , at 1 Timothy 5 : 17 , we read : “ Let the older men who preside in a fine way be reckoned worthy of double honor , especially those who work hard in speaking and teaching . ” 
 Good spiritual qualities also merit acknowledgment . 
 Showing such consideration is not favoritism . 
 “ The Wisdom From Above Is . . . 
 Full of Mercy ” 
 Why should we control our tongue ? 
 Concerning the tongue , James said : “ An unruly injurious thing , it is full of death - dealing poison . 
 With it we bless Jehovah , even the Father , and yet with it we curse men who have come into existence ‘ in the likeness of God . ’ 
 Out of the same mouth come forth blessing and cursing . ” 
 In this context , James added : “ If you have bitter jealousy and contentiousness in your hearts , do not be bragging and lying against the truth . 
 This is not the wisdom that comes down from above , but is the earthly , animal , demonic . 
 For where jealousy and contentiousness are , there disorder and every vile thing are . 
 But the wisdom from above is first of all chaste , then peaceable , reasonable , ready to obey , full of mercy and good fruits , not making partial distinctions , not hypocritical . ” ​ — James 3 : 8 - 10a , 14 - 17 . 
 How can we be merciful in the use of our tongue ? 
 Hence , the way we use our tongue is an indication of whether we have the wisdom that is “ full of mercy . ” 
 What if because of jealousy or contentiousness we were to boast , lie , or spread harmful gossip ? 
 Psalm 94 : 4 states : “ All the practicers of what is hurtful keep bragging about themselves . ” 
 And how quickly injurious talk can damage an innocent one’s good reputation ! 
 Moreover , think of the harm that can be done by “ a false witness [ who ] launches forth mere lies . ” 
 After discussing the misuse of the tongue , James says : “ It is not proper , my brothers , for these things to go on occurring this way . ” 
 True mercy requires that we use our tongue in a chaste , peaceable , and reasonable way . 
 Jesus said : “ I tell you that every unprofitable saying that men speak , they will render an account concerning it on Judgment Day . ” 
 How important it is that we be merciful in the use of our tongue ! 
 “ Forgive Men Their Trespasses ” 
 12 , 13 . ( a ) What do we learn about mercy from the parable of the slave who owed his master a large sum of money ? 
 ( b ) What does it mean to forgive our brother “ up to seventy - seven times ” ? 
 Jesus ’ parable of the slave who owed his master , a king , 60,000,000 denarii shows another way to be merciful . 
 Having no means to pay the debt , the slave begged for mercy . 
 “ Moved to pity at this , ” the master of the slave forgave his debt . 
 But the slave went out and found a fellow slave who owed him only a hundred denarii and mercilessly had him thrown into prison . 
 When the master heard what had happened , he summoned the forgiven slave and said to him : “ Wicked slave , I canceled all that debt for you , when you entreated me . 
 Ought you not , in turn , to have had mercy on your fellow slave , as I also had mercy on you ? ” 
 With that the master had him delivered to the jailers . 
 Jesus concluded the parable , saying : “ In like manner my heavenly Father will also deal with you if you do not forgive each one his brother from your hearts . ” ​ — Matthew 18 : 23 - 35 . 
 How forcefully the above - mentioned parable points out that mercy includes a readiness to forgive ! 
 Jehovah has forgiven us a huge debt of sin . 
 Should we not also “ forgive men their trespasses ” ? 
 Before Jesus related the parable about the merciless slave , Peter asked him : “ Lord , how many times is my brother to sin against me and am I to forgive him ? 
 Up to seven times ? ” 
 Jesus replied : “ I say to you , not , Up to seven times , but , Up to seventy - seven times . ” 
 Yes , a merciful person is ready to forgive “ up to seventy - seven times , ” that is , without limit . 
 According to Matthew 7 : 1 - 4 , how may we practice mercy daily ? 
 Showing still another way to display mercy , Jesus said in the Sermon on the Mount : “ Stop judging that you may not be judged ; for with what judgment you are judging , you will be judged . . . 
 Why , then , do you look at the straw in your brother’s eye , but do not consider the rafter in your own eye ? 
 Or how can you say to your brother , ‘ Allow me to extract the straw from your eye ’ ; when , look ! 
 a rafter is in your own eye ? ” 
 Therefore , we can practice mercy daily by putting up with the weaknesses of others without being judgmental or overly critical . 
 “ Work What Is Good Toward All ” 
 Why are acts of mercy not limited to fellow believers ? 
 While the Bible book of James highlights mercy among believers , this does not mean that acts of mercy are limited to those within the Christian congregation . 
 “ Jehovah is good to all , ” says Psalm 145 : 9 , “ and his mercies are over all his works . ” 
 We are exhorted to “ become imitators of God ” and to “ work what is good toward all . ” 
 While we do not love “ either the world or the things in the world , ” we are not insensitive to the needs of those in the world . ​ — 1 John 2 : 15 . 
 What factors affect the way we show mercy to others ? 
 As Christians , we do not hesitate to provide whatever help we can to victims of “ unforeseen occurrence ” or to those in dire situations . 
 Of course , circumstances would dictate what we can do and how much . 
 When providing material help to others , we want to be careful that a deed that seems good does not promote laziness . 
 Hence , a true act of mercy is a response that combines tender feelings of compassion or sympathy with sound reasoning . 
 What is the finest way to show mercy to those outside the Christian congregation ? 
 The finest way to show mercy to those outside the Christian congregation is to share Bible truth with them . 
 Why ? 
 Because the majority of mankind today are groping about in spiritual darkness . 
 Having no way to deal with problems that confront them nor any real hope for the future , most people are “ skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd . ” 
 The message of God’s Word can be ‘ a lamp to their foot , ’ helping them to deal with life’s problems . 
 It can also be ‘ a light to their roadway ’ in that the Bible foretells God’s purpose for the future , giving them a basis for having a bright hope . 
 What a privilege it is to carry the wonderful message of truth to those who are in dire need of it ! 
 In view of the nearness of the impending “ great tribulation , ” now is the time to have a zealous share in the Kingdom - preaching and disciple - making work . 
 No other act of mercy is as important . 
 Give “ the Things That Are Inside ” 
 18 , 19 . 
 Why should we work to increase the influence that mercy has on our lives ? 
 “ Give as gifts of mercy the things that are inside , ” said Jesus . 
 For a good deed to be an act of true mercy , it must be a gift that comes from inside ​ — from a loving and willing heart . 
 In a world where harshness , selfishness , and a lack of concern about the suffering and problems of others are the norm , how refreshing such mercy is ! 
 Let us , then , work to increase the influence that mercy has on our lives . 
 The more merciful we are , the more we become like God . 
 This helps us lead a truly meaningful and satisfying life . ​ — Matthew 5 : 7 . 
 What Did You Learn ? 
 • Why is it especially important to be merciful to fellow believers ? 
 • How can we practice mercy within the Christian congregation ? 
 • How may we work what is good toward those outside the congregation ? 
 [ Picture on page 26 ] 
 The Samaritan acted mercifully 
 [ Pictures on page 27 ] 
 Christians abound in acts of mercy 
 [ Picture on page 30 ] 
 The finest way to show mercy to those outside the congregation is to share Bible truth with them 
